                                BENEFITS OF MILITARY SPENDING
             An Inquiry into the Doctrine that National Defense is a Public Good.
                                                   Mason Gaffney*
                                                           1972
                                                        Abstract:
   There are two primary classes of beneficiaries: Foreign client rulers or "caciques"
and US-based multinational corporations. Caciques benefit in that we protect their
regimes. But the process usually begins with US entities operating abroad. These obtain
concessions, such as resource leases or telecommunications franchises, from shaky
foreign rulers; then they invoke "property rights" to bring in US military protection,
ensuring large capital gains. An important side benefit is maintenance of cartel
discipline, notably in the oil industry. In this fashion, rent-seeking multinationals draw us
into foreign conflicts. US taxpayers foot the bill, but do not gain as labor or in any other
way.


                                                       Contents:
BENEFITS OF MILITARY SPENDING ...................................................................................... 1
A.    Is Defense a "Public Good"?................................................................................................... 1
     1.      "Caciques" (kă-seeks′). ....................................................................................... 2
     2.      European and Japanese-based firms. .................................................................. 4
     3.      Multinational corporations.................................................................................. 4
B.    Dimensions of the Benefiting Interests................................................................................... 5
     1.      U.S. Mercantilism. .............................................................................................. 5
     2.      Multi-national firms: How great the stake? ........................................................ 6
     3.      Concentration of ownership................................................................................ 8
C.    How are Benefits Received? ................................................................................................... 9
     1.      Protecting Existing Property............................................................................... 9
     2.      Creating and Firming Tenures .......................................................................... 10
     3.      Capturing Existing Tenures .............................................................................. 17
     4.      Fencing the Common Seas ............................................................................... 18
     5.      Global Overcommitment .................................................................................. 20


*
  Paper presented at 10th Annual Conference, Committee on Taxation, Resources and Economic
Development, Madison, October 25, 1971. (Lowell Harriss, Chairman and Editor of Proceedings.) Updated
to March 29, 1972.
                                                                                                                                      2

D.     Entering the U.S. Market ...................................................................................................... 22
E.     Maintaining Cartel Discipline............................................................................................... 25
F.     Recoupment of Subsidies through Taxation of Beneficiaries............................................... 29
       1.        Expensing intangibles ....................................................................................... 30
       2.        Exemption of accrual ........................................................................................ 30
       3.        Percentage depletion. ........................................................................................ 31
       4.        Unrepatriated income........................................................................................ 31
       5.        Foreign tax credit. ............................................................................................. 31
       6.        Aid to foreign hosts........................................................................................... 32
       7.        Devaluation increment...................................................................................... 32
       8.        Selection of tax domicile. ................................................................................. 32
       9.        "Western Hemisphere Trade Corporations" ..................................................... 32
G.     The Insubstantiality of Other Benefits .................................................................................. 33
       1. Labor ..................................................................................................................... 33
            a.      The frontier thesis. ........................................................................................ 33
            b.      The underconsumption thesis. ...................................................................... 34
            c.      Military employment. ................................................................................... 34
       2.        Consumers ........................................................................................................ 38
       3.        Taxpayers.......................................................................................................... 38
       4.        Military contractors........................................................................................... 39
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 40
ENDNOTES ..................................................................................................................... 43
                              BENEFITS OF MILITARY SPENDING
                                                Mason Gaffney


          "It is an investment, not a loss, when a man dies for his country"-Dinsmore Ely.
                             (In marble, Memorial Park, Winnetka, Illinois*)


   Defense is the largest public outlay, and many other budget items are inflated if
thought to be of defense value. Unless we incorporate defense in a deliberation of who
benefits from public spending, we might swallow a camel as we strain at gnats. Military
spending has resisted analysis, even in its own terms, and the cost-effectiveness teams of
yesteryear are in the shadow. It has invited local impact studies catering to provincial
interests, and macroeconomic conjectures of all kinds. But no economist to my
knowledge has submitted military spending to a benefit-cost study in welfare terms. I
propose a few steps in this direction.

                                    A. Is Defense a "Public Good"?
   Many writers on welfare economics offer defense as the prototypical "public good,"
indivisible in production and undiminished by use. United we stand, divided we fall, like
a row of, well…dominoes.
   I doubt if the domino hypothesis is ready for the dignity of a theory. It presumes a
community of interest behind the defense wall where there is diversity, and it overlooks
the care of nationals outside the wall. It fits not the world's greatest maritime and air
power, possessed of high mobility with the option of focusing force anywhere.
   It runs counter to the historical origin and nature of national governments, including
the United States. National governments originated to establish, maintain, legitimize,
expand, allocate and police the tenure of land. Benefits are unevenly distributed among
landowners, too, because governments have given disproportionate care to their borders,
the oceans and other no-man's-lands, power vacuums, and the control of small, weak,
backward and turbulent nations. Also, owners of outpost resources are usually large and
influential. They benefit disproportionately from military outlays.
    I begin with a postulate that an aim of military spending by the United States today is
to extend sovereignty outside its borders. Since the prior goal is to secure the heartland
itself, and it is quite secure, a high share of the discretionary or marginal military dollar
should be imputed to marginal expansion, or territoriality. It goes by names like policing
the world, naval patrol, help against Communist subversion, counter-insurgency,
technical advice, surveillance, C.I.A., overseas bases, military aid, internal security,
A.I.D., NATO, OAS, SEATO, CENTO, and so on.
  Some of this marginal expansion may help secure the U.S. heartland. We must hold
Vietnam to sustain the raw material base of Japan in Southeast Asia, and thus hold Japan

*
    Taken from a letter by Dinsmore Ely, 1917, killed in action, 1918.
                                                                                              2

on our side, said Eisenhower in 1959.1 We must hold Western Europe and its raw
material bases to keep the Russians from turning them against us, was Howard Ellis'
theme in his Economics of Freedom.2 Walt Rostow said, "…our military security and our
way of life as well as the fate of Western Europe and Japan are at stake in the evolution
of the underdeveloped areas."3 And we must hold sources of raw materials required by
our military itself.
    There is a scintilla of truth in the security arguments. Yet a nation which dominates
most of the world must be engaged in more than simple "defense," and threatening others
more than they threaten us, from any objective third-party view. Edward Mason even
wrote, "The American economy is relatively invulnerable to a curtailment of foreign
sources of raw material supply."4 Certainly our gross import of minerals—about $4–5
billion—is small next to our defense budget of $83 billion. The argument of holding raw
materials to fuel the armed forces is dangerously circular. A nation whose nationals are
acquiring surplus resources around the world, and invoking the flag to help them, is
aggressing. A nation whose philosophers preach that its way of life requires continuous
expansion is dangerously minded in a finite world.
   Truth is to be found in the trade-off s. Does U.S. policy sacrifice continental security
to help its nationals acquire offshore resources? If so, we would not be acting as though
expansive acquisition were the means, but the end. There is no simple answer, but
evidence in this paper leads me to believe that U.S. policy makers often act as though
expansion were the end. They use and trade off U.S. security as a means, and
occasionally wager U.S. survival at the brink.
   The obvious beneficiaries of this extension of U.S. sovereignty are resource owners in
America outre-mer, overseas America, with preference to U.S. nationals and native allies.
Prominent classes of such beneficiaries are these.

1. "Caciques" (kă-seeks′).
   These are native landowner-administrators (in less developed countries the two offices
merge) who cooperate with U.S. forces and firms, and in return enjoy the tenure of land
free of taxes that might otherwise be needed for their defense, and other public functions.
   "Cacique" is a generic name5 often applied to men playing this role, but the role is
universal in the annals of mercantilism: "Zamindar" is the East Indian term. The
metropolitan power does not rule directly at the lower echelons.
   It works with willing natives, permitting it to control some policies over a large area or
population with a skeleton crew of metropolitans, and without being obnoxiously
obtrusive.
   Conspicuous caciques include Mr. Nguyen Van Thieu and the ruling group in Saigon;
Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, the Shah of Iran; Col. Papadopoulos in Athens; until recently
Yahya Khan of Pakistan; Anastasio Somoza of Nicaragua; Alejandro Lanusse of
Argentina; Chiang Kai-shek; Francisco Franco of Spain; Alfredo Stroessner of Paraguay;
King Hassan of Morocco; Lon Nol of Cambodia; Vang Pao of Laos; King Faisal of Saudi
Arabia; Kittikachorn and Charusathien of Bangkok; Ramon Cruz of Honduras; Joaquin
Balaguer in Santo Domingo; and so on around the world. Cacique turnover is very high,
but under and around them are the less visible, more permanent landowning-military
                                                                                           3

oligarchs such as Las Catorce, the 14 families who own El Salvador; Las Diez y nueve of
the Dominican Republic; Pakistan's 22 families; Iran's 1,000 families; and so on. These
form the cacique matrix which survives palace revolutions.
   Our caciques enjoy a greater piece of the action than Vidkun Quisling in Norway and
have more leverage. Often they antedate our presence, at least as a class, and have some
history of rule. Many we inherited from falling European empires. Others we cultivated
ourselves under the Monroe Doc trine of 1823.
   They cooperate because we relieve them of tax burdens. Most nations were
historically organized on some feudal basis, where vassals of the sovereign were assigned
lands from whose rent they paid their troops. The coming of a foreign protector financing
his own army, and paying the natives too, relieves the vassal of his main liability while
securing his income and tenure. He suffers some risks and indignity, but the rewards are
high.
   The cacique also is relieved of pressure to win support from his country's submerged
classes. He needn't educate them to build industry or increase the tax base or handle
modern weapons. He can cooperate with the United States to discourage industry at home
that might pull up wage levels, while confirming U.S. dominance in manufactures.
    The cacique is expected as a rule to open the door to U.S. firms and influentials, at
least the small number of them who dominate offshore. W. W. Rostow sees imperial
powers pushing "colonial society along the transitional path."6 But he offers no evidence,
and there probably is little. The cacique assigns the foreign firm valuable concessions and
resources, especially minerals, routes, and communications. Mining abroad, as at home,
is isolated from the rest of the local economy and affects it little; the same for plantation
agriculture. He must accommodate U.S. military bases. In Latin America he is often
graduated from U.S. Army and Air Force Southern Command schools in Panama.
Cacique governance is not likely, therefore, to be very popular at home, and U.S. aid is
used for internal security.
   Secretary McNamara testified in 1967 that the primary objective in Latin America is
to aid "indigenous military and paramilitary forces capable of providing, in conjunction
with police and other security forces, the needed domestic security."7 In 1957
Ambassador George Wadsworth said the object of strengthening the Saudi army was
"maintaining of internal security…the army would…support the throne…"8 He also
indicated concern over raids by our allies, England, France, and Israel, intimating a
partiality towards U.S. concessionaires and no immediate concern about Russia. Senator
William Fulbright notes the anomaly of the United States supporting 3.5 million "foreign
mercenaries" under arms who "usually remain neutral while we fight brushfire wars with
our own soldiers."9 The foreign mercenaries secure their own caciques. We help in that,
too.
   The cost in U.S. force to secure cacique tenure varies with circumstances. It may run
as high as the Vietnam war. Before the United States came, the Viet Minh had driven
away the landlords. Diem, U.S.-financed, had a primary objective of restoring this lost
tenure. (The operation went under the head of Diem's "land reform.") It was and is the
main source of Viet Cong support in the rural south.10 The landlords rode back on the
                                                                                            4

jeeps of U.S. soldiers.11 In 1970, "The government will not make any early efforts to
collect more direct taxes from wealthier farmers because of the difficulties involved."12
   In return for U.S. involvement in his nation, the cacique can return the intrusion. He is
more than a puppet—he has large discretionary assets to parlay. With money he can enter
into the mainstream of U.S. society and politics. The English once beheaded a king they
thought took French money, but the U.S. voter seems bored when retiring U.S.
Congressman become lobbyists for foreign powers seeking sugar quotas, aid, support,
and other benefits. The China Lobby once aroused some backlash, and Thomas A.
Pappas, Esso's Athens partner and an executive vice chairman of the Republican Finance
Committee, might too.13 But most caciques are too small to pose a perceived threat to
national masculinity.

2. European and Japanese-based firms.
   Citizens and firms of older European metropolitan nations retain large holdings behind
our protective shield. Even Spaniards retain sugar plantation-refineries in the Philippines.
Frenchmen keep rubber plantations in Annam, and rice in Cochin China. Royal
Dutch/Shell is everywhere, as is British Petroleum. U.S. diplomats have seen our interest
in sustaining these older mercantilist nations' colonial bases, even as we elbowed in.
Indeed, as "far-called their navies melt away," they are cacique material themselves. Lest
we forget, this depends on how much load U.S. taxpayers and conscripts will bear, but
caciquism is a matter of degree. Note that many benefiting firms in Europe are
subsidiaries of U.S. corporations already. Others are closely allied in cartels which the
Marshall Plan did little to weaken and much to support.14 We also hold Japan's shield, of
course, over the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere we once denied them, only with
U.S. firms participating.

3. Multinational corporations.
   These, if U.S.-based, are in the strongest position to benefit. Any U.S. national owning
land offshore is a potential multi-national, but most U.S.-owned offshore lands are in a
few hands, as we will see. As corporate shares are owned internationally, the distinction
between American-owned and other corporations becomes increasingly one only of
degree. Giant corporations also own assets everywhere. There is an international comity
of property which transcends national loyalty, and when one's treasure is scattered around
the world, so may his heart be, and his residence, and his social peer and reference
groups. The United States is useful as a police force, and so far has been willing to be
used as such, being partial, as a rule, to subsidiaries of corporations with U.S. charters. I
will give primary attention to these U.S.-based interests.
   One should not equate them with the United States, or "our side," or "U.S. business,"
or the "free world." They are individual firms, vertically integrated, each holding its own
individual resource base. They are an international society, internationally owned,
owning international assets, transcending nations. They cooperate in cartels, but they do
not supply other firms except at a price and with efforts to expand supply into control.
They do not supply the nation as such, and sell to the government only at market price,
and frequently above it. They often control world markets and sell dearer inside the
United States than outside. They do not guarantee us supply in wartime, but depend on
                                                                                          5

U.S. forces for that even in peacetime. They have achieved virtual tax exemption for their
offshore holdings. "Their" relationship with "us" is rather one-sided.

                      B. Dimensions of the Benefiting Interests

1. U.S. Mercantilism.
   Without quite shedding its colonial folkways, the United States has become the
Metropolis of the world. In 25 years since World War II we have become the largest
importer of primary products. But far beyond our position as importer is that of U.S.
firms as owners, outstandingly of mineral reserves, and also of plantations, timber,
communications, transport, factories, and distribution. These firms are the world's new
absentee landlords. They own everywhere and they sell everywhere.
   Vertical integration has ever been the way of giant firms, as well as nations, seeking
total autarky and surety against other's cornering open markets in primary products, their
raw materials. As we go to world markets, this means world land acquisition. Not far
beyond that lies cartel formation and world control of markets, adding monopoly rent to
Ricardian rent, doing unto others what we never stop fearing they are doing to us.
   We are also an indirect importer of cheap labor, through farming out cheap-labor
operations abroad. Tariff Code Item 007 has facilitated this, by limiting reimport duties to
value added abroad. But the $2 billion output under Item 007 is only 1% or 2% of our
offshore output. And labor-intensive offshore operations are not, by definition, property-
using. They involve minimal commitment of capital, and minimal resource control. They
feature quick recovery of small capital. They do not therefore require much U.S. force.
   In addition, they do not loom large in the exports of LDCs. About 84% of LDC
exports are extractive.15
    We also import cheap labor directly. The Immigration and Naturalization Service is
never funded enough to close the Mexican border. An estimated 200,000 illegal aliens
reside in Southern California,16 and a middleclass family makes no secret of keeping one
as a domestic, so weak are the sanctions against it. At cross purposes, the U.S.
Department of Labor contracts with client governments like Jamaica to import cheap
field labor for specific employers.17 Some application of U.S. force is involved, but the
labor comes voluntarily by and large. Organized U.S. labor works to contain both
situations, and again this export of cheap labor does not dominate the balance for LDCs.
   U.S. miners and oilmen, on the other hand, are less concerned about cheap foreign
labor, because labor, especially foreign, looms small among their costs.18 In Kuwait,
Adelman reports that lifting costs, including capital, are less than 5% of the F.O.B. value
of oil, and much of the payroll is for U.S. and British nationals anyway.19 Kuwait
represents an extreme, but few extractive industries are labor-intensive. Creole
Petroleum, Esso's Venezuela arm, in 1960 paid $3.19 in dividends for each $1 of wages
and salaries.20 21 The prime concerns of U.S. extractors are tenure, taxes, and avoiding
pure competition. Here is where U.S. force may be helpful or vital, because here are the
provinces of government and politics.
                                                                                             6


2. Multi-national firms: How great the stake?
   The net value of America outre-mer comes from four main sources: net capital flows;
plow-backs; appropriation; and appreciation. The gross value of what is controlled also
rises as U.S. firms borrow abroad.
   Net reported capital outflows have been quite small. They were well under $1 billion
yearly until 1956, when they jumped to a new level about $1.5 billion.22 23 The book
value of U.S. private investment abroad was only $37 billion in 1962,24 and most of that
came from plow-backs.25 Return flows are disproportionately large, around $3 billion,
and income larger yet, because over half of reported income is plowed back, and reported
income is understated by inflating depletion and depreciation. Even the return flows are
too high for the cumulated capital outflows, unless at implausibly high rates of return.
Assuming away the last, the high return flows betray the presence of a larger base than
could result from cumulated capital flows, suggesting a large role for plow-backs,
appropriation, and appreciation.
    James Akins, U.S. Department of State, has said U.S. policy in the Middle East is
premised on the "huge U.S. investment in oil," and few would doubt it. But what is this
huge investment, and whence? According to Robert Engler, Bahrein Petroleum Co., Ltd.
had an original capital of $100,000. In 15 years, spanning World War II, it accumulated
profits and surplus of $91 millions. Caltex, a Bahaman-chartered child of Texaco and
Socal set up to market Bahrein oil, accumulated $25 million from an original one million
in ten years.26 These may be extreme cases, but they do suggest the relative importance of
plow-backs, appropriation, and appreciation. Indeed they may omit the last two.
   The forebear of Aramco was organized in 1933 with a capital of $100,000. In 1947 its
assets were reported at $150 million.27 Actually, in 1947, Esso and Socony Mobil paid
$101 million for 40% of Aramco, indicating a total value around $250 million. The
Middle East was not at that time very secure, and the willingness of U.S. taxpayers to
police the world not yet established. In 1956 Aramco netted $280 million after all taxes
and royalties.28 Capitalizing at 6%, that flow of net income was worth nearly $5 billion,
and if its growth rate were projected it would be much more. "Book value" in 1972 is
reported at $500 million. But Aramco doesn't believe it, either. Now that Arabia is
demanding a share of ownership, Aramco is citing a much higher value based on future
profits.28A29
   The Chase Manhattan Bank's "oil balance of payments" for 1964 showed an
investment income of $1.9 billion, less new investment of $.9 billion, for a net inflow of
$1.0 billion, projected to increase to $2.3 billion in 1975.30 The Bank reported the capital
exported for oil exploration in the entire Mid east, 1947–62, at $2.7 billion.31 Putting it all
together, it would seem that appropriation and appreciation loomed large. Or, as the
American Enterprise Association put it, "…none of the private foreign investment figures
allow for increases in the value of direct investment attributable to changes in
profitability."32 "…book values…may represent half or less of market values."33
   Other measures of our offshore stake are disproportionately large next to cumulated
capital outflows.
                                                                                              7

   One is the return flow of income, as we have seen. Definitions of income are
treacherous. It is understated by expensing exploration and development investments,
omitting unrealized capital gains, accelerating depreciation (this results in net
understatement so long as there is growth, as there has been), and taking percentage
depletion not limited by cost. Some for promotional purposes may overstate it, as
Occidental Petroleum is charged. On the whole it is grossly understated, and we should
not only double return flows to account for plow-backs but then raise them more again.
But doubling $3 billion is quite enough to show a flow too large to come from cumulated
capital exports.
    Another index is output. America outre-mer now has a GNP estimated at over $100
billion. One estimate is $200 billion,34 making it the third or fourth largest economy in
the world.35 It is four or five times larger than exports from the United States.
    Output is only loosely related to assets, and labor-using multinationals could pile up
large gross products on a small base of capital. But $100 billion of output from some $40
billion capital would mean a capital output ratio of 0.4, which is too low to believe. Most
studies indicate 3 as more typical of the ratio. By this standard, Peter G. Peterson's recent
figure of $78 billion as the value of U.S. private overseas investments is also much too
low.36
   And mineral holdings generally, and large offshore ones especially, are capital and
resource-intensive. David Martin estimated the ore Reserve/Output ratio of U.S. Steel in
1963 at 100 years.37 The life-index of Caribbean bauxite held by U.S. firms is 50 years or
more. Lumber firms often hold more than half a century's timber reserve behind a mill,
ridiculous as that may be. World oil reserves are more than 35 times annual output.38
E. N. Avery has put this ratio at 45 for the international majors, and 24 for all others.39
   Oil and mining firms are at the top of any list of industrial firms ranked by assets per
employee, or per unit of output.40 Utilities, transport and communications rank even
higher.41 The use of property tends to be regressive, because the cost of capital is
regressive. Foreign holdings are large holdings (see next section). Therefore, foreign
holdings would loom larger measured by value than by output.
    Another index is earnings. These are a closer index to asset values than is gross output,
since earnings come from assets, basically, rather than labor. In 1965, reported earnings
from corporate foreign investment were $8 billion, compared to $36 billion domestic.42
Mineral earnings are badly underreported by expensing investments in exploration and
development, and (for tax accounting anyway) taking percentage depletion not limited by
costs. Add to this that a large share of offshore income comes as accrual of asset value
which is not even counted in the statistics on gross product. A large share of U.S. capital
export goes into exploration for or other acquisition of minerals, and Reserve/Output
ratios abroad are much higher than at home. Minerals generally appreciate between
acquisition and use. Appreciation is a form of income that rewards the capital committed
but does not appear in data on output or earnings.
   A fourth index is market power. Although it is not cardinal or precise, it means more
than most things that are. U.S. firms are known to dominate world markets in many fields
to a degree not very credible if premised on the tiny sum of capital exports. U.S. holdings
abroad are concentrated in mining and banking, communications and manufacturing—not
                                                                                               8

in local service (other than utilities). Just as a corporation can dominate a small town, so
U.S.-owned factories can have influence beyond their own value in native economies.
   The importance of appropriation and appreciation relative to actual capital outlays was
charmingly expressed by Abraham Chayes, State Department legal adviser, concerning
Intelsat: "The fact is the Europeans are anxious to put up a greater share of the money
than we think they are entitled to."43 Those are words to ponder. Mr. Chayes had not gone
through the looking-glass. He was adapting his lexicon to the special world of those who
get in on the ground floor.

3. Concentration of ownership.
   An important dimension of U.S. foreign holdings is the high concentration of their
ownership.44 Absentee ownership has ever been the province of large investors. Small
capitals stay close to their owners, who need capital in their own businesses and to
complement their own labor. Small assets go into declining areas and rapidly
depreciating capital of high turnover, where the ratio of management input to capital is
high.
   Large concentrations of capital move into offshore interests for the opposite set of
reasons. They have surplus capital and a management bottleneck. They favor assets
requiring minimal management per dollar of capital. Resource industries with high
Reserve/Output ratios are an excellent way to invest large capital and minimize volume
and the management effort each cycle of turnover entails. Larger firms enjoy economies
of scale in influencing government, including the State Department, C.I.A., and
Pentagon.
    Accordingly, many empirical studies have shown that absentee investment is large
investment.45 When the United States was a colony, it was the Europeans here who
looked large. Now we are Mother, it is large U.S. firms that dominate our colonial
interests. In 1950, 10 firms held 40% of U.S. assets abroad.46 In 1957, 45 firms held 57%
of U.S. direct foreign investment (as the Department of Commerce defines and measures
"investment").47 48 To a degree this reflects concentration of domestic control, but the
larger firms are more committed offshore. In the oil industry, the largest one, the pattern
is well known. The domestics are small "independents." The giants all become
international, and the largest are five of the seven sisters, the international majors who
dominate the world. The friction between the small domestics and the large internationals
is one of the basic parameters of U.S. politics.
   Twenty-four U.S. oil firms have about 93% of U.S.-owned holdings abroad. Other
minerals are comparable: 20 U.S. mining firms have 95% of all foreign holdings.49 Two
U.S. firms produced 90% of Chile's copper; 3 mine 83% of Peru's copper; 2 control 100%
of Zambia's copper; and one Belgian firm controls 100% of Congo's copper.50 Magdoff
alleges that 259 out of 298 foreign branches of U.S. banks were owned by the top 3
(National City, Chase Manhattan, and Bank of America) in 1967.51 Forty percent of U.S.
direct investment in West Germany, France and Britain belongs to 3 firms (Esso, GM,
and Ford).52 Seventy-eight percent of the chrome ore running the embargo out of
Rhodesia is from Union Carbide.53 The top 3 nickel producers have 95% of the world
market.54 One could go on.
                                                                                            9

   Benefits to U.S. nationals abroad are then quite progressive. The old safety-valve
concept of the frontier in U.S. history made it an outlet for the poor. Our present colonial
frontiers are frontiers for great wealth, instead.

                             C. How are Benefits Received?
   Extraterritoriality is not generally extended to U.S. citizens abroad as persons. The
U.S. tourist may pine in jail like native miscreants, or worse. No one has suggested
invading Spain or Turkey to rescue U.S. drug offenders.
   U.S. soldiers receive no special benefits either. William the Conqueror confiscated
England from the losing team and parceled it among his warriors, and the United States
democratized the process by granting land scrip to veterans in the 19th century. But no
more: the draft is cheaper. The winning soldiers come off worse than the losing
landowners. Lives are at stake, but property is usually not. Losing landowners are
vulnerable to inroads by war- nourished property interests of the winning team, so there
may result a postwar transfer of property, but it is not taken by soldiers. That would be
looting. As for POWs, they have had a long wait. "We don't see it as a major political
problem," said an administration aide recently.55

1. Protecting Existing Property
   U.S. nationals do benefit from military spending in their capacity as owners of
property in foreign lands, especially lands of turbulent political conditions where U.S.
forces constitute an important part of the police force. Protection of existing property is
the most obvious part of this benefit. Some simple iron-hand examples are the CIA
overthrow of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala, 1954, with the return of confiscated
lands to United Fruit; landing Marines in Lebanon, in coordination with British
paratroopers in Jordan, in 1958 to assure that the revolutionary government in "Iraq
respects Western oil interests;56 the Bay of Pigs episode of 1961; the Santo Domingo
landing of 1965 to keep Bosch from power and protect the privileges which Trujillo had
granted to influential Wm. Pawley;57 the Congo intervention of 1964; and the CIA
overthrow of Mossadegh in Iran in 1954 to denationalize oil. It is hard to know what
Kindleberger has in mind when he writes in 1969, "The days of sending gunboats and
Marines to protect U.S. property abroad have gone…"58 The Eisenhower Doctrine is that
we intervene when asked.
    The Vietnam war is only slightly less simple. Henry Kissinger, Rockefeller-linked, is
widely quoted as saying, "Ridiculous! There is no oil in Vietnam."59 It is only frosting on
the cake that Thieu is leasing offshore grants to some twenty firms. The domino theory
says that those supporting the war had in mind the wealth of the Indies, which is much in
oil, dominated by Jersey, Mobil, and Caltex. It is an old concern. In 1941 FDR also drew
the line at Saigon, provoking the attack on Pearl Harbor. In 1945 Secretary of State
Cordell Hull, picking up the pieces, evinced only a "narrow concern" over Indonesia--a
concern that U.S. firms, then mainly Stanvac, retain their tenures there.60
    More generally, keeping some 400 air, naval and army bases around the world, with
air and naval patrol, helps create respect for U.S.-held tenures. The effect is everywhere,
but is pinpointed where there are U.S.-owned minerals. Secretary McNamara put it: "We
also have a strong interest in maintaining our alliance relationships with Greece, Turkey,
                                                                                            10

and Iran, for these three countries stand between the Soviet Union and the warm water
ports and oil resources of the Middle East."61 This is equated with national defense. The
President's International Development Advisory Board concluded: "The loss of any of
these ("strategic") materials, through aggression, would be the equivalent of a grave
military setback."62

2. Creating and Firming Tenures
   To view the benefits in static and defensive terms would be, however, to
underestimate the dynamism of Americans abroad, and to misapprehend the whole
process of overlaying an advanced commercial culture on the vaguely defined tenures
and wayward governments of the less developed world. "The British gunboat in the
harbor when d'Arcy got his first oil concession in Persia conveys an air of market
imperfection."63 U.S. force today is not just protecting tenure, it is creating tenure where
there was none; firming up precarious tenures and enriching lean tenures; and easing
transfer of tenure to the hands of U.S. nationals.
    Much of U.S.-held tenures in turbulent lands are not really property until policed, or to
the extent policed. Tenure granted by unstable governments is not worth much, and is
cheap to acquire. In 1960 "Premier Patrice Lumumba of the Congo signed over one-half
of his country's riches for 50 years" to Wall Street financier Edgar Detwiler, for a small
loan.64 If an extension of Pax Americana stabilizes the pliant government, the quality of
tenure rises: precarious becomes firm. Thus a small stake can swell into a large one. It
may be done by shoring up a shaky Sheik. Or we may impose an Anglo-Saxon
construction of strict tenure on a concession made, like Manhattan, by Indians under a
limited concept, or by Hispanic peoples with their regalian concept of an overriding
utilidad publica in minerals. Where words mean different things to different contracting
parties, lex fortioris speaks a universal tongue.
   International economists have neglected this aspect of the return on capital. Unrealized
capital gains are invisible to the unschooled eye, and the schooling has been weak.
Mikesell can stress that U.S. firms make only moderate returns on foreign holdings (other
than oil) and chide the "delusion" of host nations that alien corporations may exploit
them.65 If one overlooks a large part of the return, and—like the IRS—looks only at
realized ordinary cash income net of inflated deductions, one may so conclude. But
investors look deeper and so should economists.
   Dean Acheson wrote that he was Present at the Creation. He was too modest. The
State Department has presided over the creation of more than the Truman Doctrine
containment policy. Tenure over resources is constantly in creation at the margins of
settlement and technology, and constantly being refined and tightened at each succeeding
level of higher density, technology, and commercialization. Creating new tenure is not a
sometime thing; it is a constant process and a major preoccupation of metropolitan
investors in colonies. The State Department helps.66
   Submarginal resources are not generally defined, surveyed, measured, known…or
policed. Lack of policing alone can make them submarginal.
   Tenure is vague, ambiguous, shared, or irrelevant to what turns out to be the highest
use (like the right to fish in the Los Angeles River, or farm over a strip mine). In this
                                                                                             11

limbo, tenure is established by a nice combination of discovery, prior appropriation, and
power. The Rule of Capture is the worldwide custom of miners when operating (as they
often do) outside of matters yet defined by law. Prior position did not win much for the
Indians, who lacked power, and power did not win oil or gold for the Mexicans who
never discovered it, but the Anglos put all three together and pushed Manifest Destiny
around the world. Priority, discovery, and power, these three: and the greatest of these is
power. The major asset of U.S. concessionaires abroad is the capitalized value of the flag.
   Lenin wrote in 1917, "For the first time the world is completely divided up, so that in
the future only redivision is possible…"67 How little he knew! True, there are no blank
spots on the map. Neither were there many in 1823, but a good deal has been firmed up
since then. Today, the most obvious unsettled area is the ocean floor, with oil companies
taking exploration leases—a step towards tenure—on the continental shelves by the ten
thousand square miles.
  To legitimize drilling in the Gulf of Mexico, President Truman unilaterally extended
U.S. sovereignty out to a variously defined "edge of the continental shelf." There was no
one to dispute it in 1945. We had a nuclear monopoly, and all the chips.
   Twenty companies have applied for offshore concessions in Vietnam.68 All the
shallow seas, gulfs, and straits of the East Indies are under lease. The entire east coast of
Asia, which we have spent dearly to control, is spotted with leases and/or prospectors
from Bali to Korea. Singapore is now a major producer of deep-water drilling rigs, as
well as the shallow water "swamp buggies" now being proffered to Peking.69 Saigon,
Djakarta, Seoul and Taipei are among the lessors; Hanoi, Peking, and Pyongyang are not.
   Many areas are claimed by two or more sovereigns, like Vermont in the days of the
Wentworth Grants and the war with New York. Some are in dispute between different
levels or agencies of the same government, like tidelands oil in the United States itself,
and "free-wheeling" Indonesian General Sutowo signed oil concessions that were
cancelled by his superior, the minister of mines, but upheld by General Suharto, for
whose army the oil money is earmarked.70
   Unpopulated land areas are also interesting. Indonesia has granted 30 million acres to
foreign firms, mostly United States.71
   But those are only the margins of it. A land area may be populated without having
stable government, and land tenure is no more secure than the government that polices it.
Where government is weak, tenure may be influenced by alien force.
   When knights were bold, they would move into a troubled land, slay the defenders,
and divide up their lands and chattels. We no longer use those crude methods. The
American way in the 19th century was what is now called a Fifth Column. Armed Anglo-
Americans settled in Louisiana Territory were so obvious an occupying force that
Napoleon was glad to get a few dollars from Jefferson for a quitclaim. He was in no
position to sell a warranty deed. In l821, Spain likewise recognized the Anglo occupation
of Florida. When Mexico ceded us another empire in 1846, we had already moved in in
force. Queen Liliuokalani met the same fate in 1893.
  As we wax wealthier, our methods grow more capital-intensive: fewer bodies, more
money. This calls for modified procedures drawing on the models perfected by Imperial
                                                                                                          12

Britain. How can U.S. firms influence foreign statesmen? Just as they do at home, only
cheaper. A U.S. firm pioneers, allying with a local ruler or would-be ruler who needs
Yankee dollars. Lending is a common entry.
   Weak governments have the highest time-preference, and have been known to barter
away the nation's future for a pittance in front money. The local ruler may be corrupt and
ready to sell out his nation's wealth to increase his own by a much smaller amount. As
Henry Gomez puts it, "During the dictatorship (in Venezuela), any differences that arose
between the government and the companies were settled within the context of a
gentlemen's agreement."72 There are rival juntas and cabals and cliques, and just plain
gangs, like the Ton Ton Macoutes of Haiti, to back. In some cultures that has become
habitual, so the U.S. firm suffers no guilt of originating sin. It is enough to excel at it.
What U.S. firms sometimes lack in finesse they make up in wealth.
   After that they may invoke what Mikesell calls the "powerful sanctions" of the U.S.
Government, and "sanctity of contracts", "property rights", "legal justice and
international morality." To exemplify these qualities and "constitutional and responsible
government," he cites the present regime in Brazil,73 the product of what he calls a
"military coup."74
   The cacique has a survival problem and needs friends, preferably rich and powerful.
"…Peru allowed Occidental to explore for oil on the frontier only because it felt the
United States might intervene if Ecuador caused trouble."75 Internal survival is the more
common problem. What better solution than to grant land tenure to a U.S. firm with
influence at State? The less legal, the more one-sided the grant, the more it depends on
the grantor's personal welfare, and the greater personal support he commands from his
U.S. friends. This arrangement has merits for the U.S. friends as well, and the added
benefit that U.S. force can help discourage the cacique or his successor from reneging.
    The best thing for a cacique to give away is something he needn't take from anyone
who thinks he owns it. Answering this need is property in minerals not yet discovered,
i.e., exploration leases, and invisible resources like the radio spectrum, whose use
demands the sophistication that metropolitans hold over colonials. Complexity and
unfamiliarity also help deflect criticism. Thus, IT&T, whose political influence at home
has surfaced in March 1972 in the Kleindienst* affair, "has a 20-year joint venture with
the Indonesian government to operate that country's first commercial satellite
communications earth station…" IT&T subsidiary Rayonier is receiving timber
concessions, too.76 Current Jack Anderson revelations indicate IT&T has used money and
the CIA to intervene in Chilean politics, and by inference, why not elsewhere?
   All resources now submarginal but potentially rent-yielding are more interesting to
metropolitans, with their superior finances and waiting power, than to colonials. Even
unknown resources are interesting. Clarence Randall commented on uranium in the
Congo, "What a break it was for us that the mother country was on our side! And who
can possibly foresee today which of the vast unexplored areas of the world may likewise

*
  President Nixon's Attorney General Richard Kleindienst pleaded guilty to perjury for withholding
information from the Senate regarding the settlement of an anti-trust suit against ITT, allegedly in exchange
for a $400,000 campaign contribution.
                                                                                         13

possess some unique deposit of raw material which in the fullness of time our industry or
defense program may need?"77
   The cacique is probably strongest when he can leave traditional resources like
farmland in the tenure of natives. Absentee ownership of coffee, cotton, sugar and banana
lands in Cuba and Guatemala was the stuff of revolution. Bolivia, on the other hand,
rejected even the charismatic Che, because Paz Estenssoro's land reform had created a
conservative countryside.
   In today's world it is important to maintain the substance of empire without the
appearance. Many like to feel, with Professor Mikesell, that critics of U.S. absentee
owners are "emotional," "dominated by chauvinistic nationalism," and that absentee
owners are "vilified" and "persecuted in the press by the leftist and demagogic elements,"
and are victimized as the "symbol of the economic imperialism of a half century or more
ago."78 So U.S. force is mostly latent, and positive incentives are stressed instead.
Mikesell summarizes this low-profiled approach: "Diplomatic protection does not rest on
formal treaties alone. The vital interest of foreign countries in maintaining cordial
relations with the United States which arises from our aid programs and other economic
relations provides an opportunity for effective representation by our officials on behalf of
the interests of American (sic) investors. It goes without saying that such pressures must
be applied subtly and with intelligent understanding of the issues and, above all, the
avoidance of actions or statements which give the appearance of interference with the
internal affairs of the local government."79 Dean Rusk likewise puts it in velvet: "So our
influence is used wherever it can be and persistently, through our embassies on a day-to-
day basis, in our aid discussion and in direct negotiation, to underline the importance of
private investment."80
   Such pressures control LDC standing governments, and also serve as means to
intervene to undermine a man and finance his replacement, as in Brazil in 1964, when
AID dried up for Joao Goulart. The succeeding military junta of Castelo Branco in 1965
got ten times as much.81 Goulart had tried to assert national control over oil, disputing
Esso.82 Ambassador Lincoln Gordon supported Branco, and President Johnson wired
congratulations to Branco before the exiled Goulart had packed his bags. According to
Simon Hanson, State was punishing Brazil beginning in 1960 for refusing to grant oil
concessions to ex-officials of the U.S. Government.83 Castelo Branco, on the other hand,
was "halting the previous trend toward state ownership…New foreign investment is
being sought for development of minerals and petrochemicals…"84 When Brazilian
President Emilio G. Medici, a career soldier and military dictator, visited Washington on
December 7, 1971, "Nelson Rockefeller, who has been decorated by the Brazilian
government for his extensive interests there, came down from New York with Happy for
the dinner."85 Today, Brazil "is experiencing a dynamic growth that has been helped by a
steady inflow of aid dollars that have been cut back elsewhere."86
   The Hanna Company of the influential George Humphrey firmed up its uncertain
tenure to iron deposits, a railroad right of way, and a port. Besides Humphrey, the strong
man of the Eisenhower administration, it brought in a former Under Secretary of State
and son of Herbert Hoover, the son of John Foster Dulles, and John J. McC1oy, ex-
President of the World Bank.87 Mikesell is critical of those interpreting this as applying
                                                                                           14

U.S. political pressure, yet it does seem to fit the "pressures…applied subtly" which he
advocates above. Some might question the subtlety.
    In l963, the Hickenlooper Amendment provided that AID be cut off for any nation
expropriating U.S. tenures without adequate compensation. It was aimed at Peru and at
President Illía of Argentina.88 General Ongania replaced him in 1966 with a military
dictatorship which met all criteria for receiving AID.89 Hickenlooper has been invoked
against Ceylon, under Kennedy, on behalf of Esso. On January 19, 1972, President Nixon
announced his intent to invoke it against future expropriations.90 The United States
Senate on October 30, 1971, "killed" the foreign aid bill because the U.N. had expelled
Taiwan. It was a clumsy lunge, yet betrayed something about AID. "…nationalization …
(of Chilean copper) would also have impaired the flow of international capital for other
purposes, including loans from the international public lending agencies and from
AID…"91 Hollis Chenery, an AID official, described its objectives as three: "…our own
selfish interest…internal stability…security of the U.S."92 It is used "in countries where
we value the preservation of the present government."93 Emilio Collado, Treasurer of
Jersey Standard, testified the United States should "make clear to all countries that the
record of their treatment of private capital, domestic and foreign, will be an important
factor in any decision on foreign aid."94 Howard Ellis supports aid as a "weapon of
international diplomacy." "Compared to either the ethical or the economic arguments, it
is the political grounds for foreign aid which are overwhelmingly important."95 Edward
Mason writes, "The overwhelming important explanation lies in U.S. security interests."96
Walt Rostow wrote we should use aid to overcome the reluctance of LDCs to allow
export of "resources which could be further exploited to provide the supplies needed by
the industries of Japan, Western Europe, and the U.S."97
    More skillful thrusts are delivered by more sophisticated fencers, who often deplore
the ham-handed Hickenlooper approach. "Capital for (developing minerals) cannot be
borrowed by state enterprises from international institutions such as the World Bank
since these institutions do not want to compete with capital available from international
mineral and petroleum companies."98 The Export-Import Bank cuts off credit to
government-owned oil companies.99 Nkrumah of Ghana was overthrown by a coup in
1967; his military successor gave concessions to U.S. firms and enjoys a good credit line
at IMF.100
   This procedure is but another instance of the leverage of private investment over
public, and a homely analogy may make it clearer. Beloit, Wisconsin, recently annexed
an island of land several miles east of its limits, qualifying it for city services. This
multiplied the value of the land. It is only incidental that the owner was a brother of a city
councilman—he might have been a cousin, banker, or law partner instead.
   Public outlay turns to private gain as the central power extends its wing over a less
developed country. The payoff comes to him who gets tenure cheap and then redirects
public spending his way. Often the benefits are more diffused, as in Los Angeles where
the cities subsidize police and water for the whole county. In either case, the way to profit
from the taxpayers' money is to get in on the ground floor. That means moving out in
advance of government, securing tenure cheap, and then invoking government.
                                                                                           15

   Another homely analogy is in swamp land and flood plains. An influential buys vast
areas cheap and then summons other taxpayers to control the floods. It is entirely fitting
that the federal agency administering most of the dollars spent in this way is in the
Department of Defense.
   On the local level, government brings sewer, water, streets, and so on—and police.
Taxes come too, but the balance of advantage is to the frontiers. That is how we get urban
sprawl, and overextended governments. On the global level it is mainly police that the
U.S. finances for offshore America. There is no increase of taxes at all. This is how we
get global sprawl and overcommitted armed forces.
   Minerals are not the only resource subject to these kinds of economic forces. Any
resource whose use entails research is similar: "research" is a kind of exploration.
Taxpayer-financed research in communications has developed the communications
satellite, and a novel U.S. corporation that shares ownership with 45 governments.101
Some $6 billions of the defense budget each year goes for "R&D." Discoveries are
patentable by private contractors, with no interest given to the United States.
   Yet another kind of tenure in property is the privilege of entering licensed businesses.
A banking charter, where numbers are limited, is the very archetype of such property.
Charters are not usually sold or rented to the highest bidder, and therefore are given in the
only other likely way, i.e., to those with influence. Client governments of the United
States have been giving bank charters to U.S.-based banks, presumably in response to the
suasion a patron exerts on a client state. The U.S. government deposits its funds in these
banks, helping them get well started. In India at various times it was estimated the U.S.
government held as much as 20% of the money in the nation.
   Three U.S. banks have almost all the overseas branches: First National City, Chase
Manhattan, and Bank of America.102 Stillman Rockefeller heads the first; David
Rockefeller the second. As an added stimulus, the Edge Act of 1919 amended the Federal
Reserve Act to let offshore subsidiaries invest directly in mining, trade, manufacturing,
etc. Overseas loans are free from U.S. anti-usury laws, and it has been said that for the
Edge Act banker, life only begins at 7%.
   Bank charters are only the type, however. Developing economies teem with special
privileges begging to be hooked: licenses, quotas, franchises, zoning variances, price
supports, air and shipping routes, water rights, rights of way, broadcast bands, telephone
monopolies, subsidies, cheap loans, patents, concessions, etc. To control or influence a
client government in an LDC is to have an inside track to tenure of these privileges when
they are first being passed out. It is like being able to go back in a time machine and get
grandfathered in on the Kern River before the Army Corps of Engineers donated Isabella
Dam; or the exclusive right to truck between New York and Boston before they had ten
million people and an Interstate Highway link; or a cotton farm before price supports; or
the Chicago-Los Angeles air route before jets.
   The possibilities are limited only by the imagination. A bit of the spectrum was
painted by Joseph Palmer in l968: "Their (Africans') respect for our interests is illustrated
by their special facilities and rights made available to us… American civil and military
aircraft use African airspace; U.S. naval ships call at African ports; and the U.S.
maintains space-tracking and communications facilities on African soil. U.S. investment
                                                                                           16

[is] involved in…copper, bauxite, iron ore, uranium, petroleum, manganese, and scarce
minerals."103
   Comsat is a splendid example of the genre. It was set up in 1963, with control pretty
well vested in AT&T, to handle the "revenue-producing" aspects of satellite relays, in the
words of D. D. Eisenhower. The satellite was a product of military research. Its operation
required an allocation of frequency rights around the world. The United States secured
these rights at an Extraordinary Conference of the International Telecommunications
Union (ITU), Geneva, 1963. Dr. Charyk, President of Comsat, supported the United
States claim, saying, "Who is there first has a priority, so to speak."104 Here again we see
the basic trinity: discovery, priority, and power. For the third, which is still the greatest,
Comsat Chairman James McCormack, said, "…[Comsat] serves as a representative of the
U.S. Government."105
   Air routes are another example. For years Pan American, the "chosen instrument,"
represented the U.S. Government, like a modern East India Company.
    Pan Am works closely with the Air Force, contracting the management of bases.
Today the U.S. Government in effect allocates rights to fly across the Pacific. The U.S.
does not own the Pacific, yet victory over Japan gave us control. We also won and built
air bases, and operate navigation aids. The sale of air routes is not, however, helping pay
the national debt, or helping disabled veterans. The routes are given away. Then their
value is enhanced by a monopoly of lucrative Military Air Command passenger
contracts, and stands to rise further when Senators Magnuson and Cannon succeed in
requiring MAC to give half its oversea cargo to the commercial air lines.106
   There is also the kind of quota given by a cartel, that is, tenure over a share of the
market in a country. While this is not usually granted explicitly by government, it often
entails advice, and always consent. It entails the real estate of marketing, too: tank farms,
rights of way, gas stations. Thus ECA and MSA (European Cooperation Administration
and Mutual Security Administration) funds to "aid European reconstruction" were
funneled to the seven sisters, members of the International Petroleum Cartel. U.S. firms
got the largest part of increased refining capacity. "Marketing apportionments" were
respected.107 It is likely that U.S. aid is used similarly in many recipient countries to
strengthen tenure over shares of the market by cartels.
   Market control often entails patents. Extension of U.S. sovereignty extends the market
within which patent privileges are policeable. Sale or exploitation of U.S. patents in client
nations has been a large source of revenue to U.S. firms.
   The U.S. Trade Treaty with the Philippines, the Laurel-Langley Agreement of 1956,
makes quite a point that the public domain of the Philippines, which under Spanish law
includes all subsurface minerals under private land, shall be "open to" U.S. citizens.108
Government in the Philippines is corrupt, seeming to open the door to U.S. interests to
acquire Philippine minerals. How this process may operate has been described in Quebec
by Canadian Premier Trudeau:"…the real money comes from huge corporations and
wealthy enterprises that willingly give to the parties which…promise (and
deliver)…special franchises, valuable contracts without tender, mining or hydro rights of
inestimable value, for a row of pins—to say nothing of openly tolerating profitable
infringements of the law (as is the case of timber-cutting operations)."109
                                                                                         17

   Once the U.S. firm has established some claim to tenure, what U.S. force provides is a
kind of Title Insurance. Indeed, we call it that. The Economic Cooperation Act of 1948
established Overseas Property Insurance Corporation (OPIC), Federally underwritten
insurance against expropriation and inconvertibility abroad.110 The host country must
execute a bilateral treaty with the U.S.: then U.S. investors there may be insured. The
Foreign Assistance Act of 1963 denied aid to any LDC failing to enter into this
"investment guarantee program." Seventy aid-getters have signed.111
    OPIC is not a profit-making insurance enterprise. Premiums collected so far total
millions less than claims. Anaconda currently claims $313 millions for its Chilean copper
losses. IT&T claims $108 million.112 Congress must make up the short-fall.113 Insurance
in force, the total contingent liability, was $3.8 billion in 1971.114
   When OPIC pays an expropriated firm it assumes its assets and claims. This puts the
expropriating power in the position of violating a treaty and wrongfully holding property
of the U.S. Government, provocation enough to justify bringing to bear the full-weight of
U.S. pressure. Naturally we whisper before we shout: denying credit, withdrawing aid,
shuffling coffee agreements, shifting support to rival juntas, cutting sugar quotas,
withdrawing landing rights…there are ways and ways. The Marines are an ultimate
sanction, to be spared when possible. Yet the credibility of threats hangs on latent power
which has to be shown periodically. This lends substance to John MacNaughton's Memo:
70% of our aim in Vietnam is "to avoid a humiliating U.S. defeat [to our reputation as a
guarantor]… To preserve our…effectiveness in the rest of the world.115
   So long as governments allocate tenures and analogous privileges without bidding, or
other recoupment device like taxing rents, the control of government is the road to
unearned riches. So long as the United States is willing, the prospective grantees will
draw us into wars.

3. Capturing Existing Tenures
   Another contribution of U.S; force is capturing existing tenures, the prospect that
Lenin emphasized.116 Oil is an example. Before 1914, the English and Dutch had frozen
Esso out of the Persian and Southeast Asia areas. After 1918 the United States insisted
that it "has contributed to the common victory," so its firms should get concessions in the
mandated lands of the old Turkish Empire.117 Britannia ruled the waves; hence the
minerals of the Persian Gulf area, but an ally could make waves, too. Benefits to Esso
and Socony (in Iraq Petroleum Co.) evidently were regarded as compensation of some
sort to the "U.S."118 Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State, 1921-25, became known
to critics as Secretary for Oil.119
   Former German holdings were also interesting. The U.S. Department of State pressed
the Dutch to open those in Sumatra to U.S. firms. As part of the bargain, Dutch Shell
received concessions on the public domain in the United States. "…with respect to land
leases…the [Dutch] wish to maintain friendly relations with the U.S. was an important
factor in creating a satisfactory atmosphere for negotiation."120 Some people put things so
nicely. The voice was State's voice, but the hands were the hands of Esso. Thus the
subsidiary Stanvac received leases, the basis of its presence in Sumatra.121 Dinsmore
Ely's investment was yielding a return.
                                                                                            18

   In 1930, again, State stepped in to persuade Great Britain to let Socal keep a
concession in Bahrein, a stepping stone that soon led to Saudi Arabia.122 In 1934, Gulf
landed Kuwait. Had the U.S. Navy then outweighed Britain's as it does now, Gulf would
not have had to give half to B.P.123 In 1936, Socal joined Texaco in Caltex (for
marketing) and Calirabian (for Saudi Arabia; in 1944 it became Aramco). When
Calirabian secured a final concession from Ibn Saud, in 1939, State "quickly established
relations…largely as a result of our (sic) interest in the development of Arabian oil
resources."124
   In 1940, F. D. Roosevelt observed, "…in carrying on this war, the British may have to
part with that control, and we, perhaps, can step in…It is a terribly interesting thing…"125
During World War II, Calirabian (Caltex, Aramco) faced rising demands from Ibn Saud.
They prevailed upon the United States to supply those demands as "Lend-Lease," and the
protection of the flag to boot.126 The Brewster Committee (U.S. Senate, 1948) said,
"They constantly sought the cloak of U.S. protection and financial assistance to preserve
their vast concessions."127 Mikesell and Chenery added, "Company officials frequently
serve as informal advisers to the King and his ministers and perform the function of an
unofficial ambassador in Washington… The foreign policy of the U.S. coincides more or
less with that of the oil company."128
   After the war, "aid to Britain" from the United States had a price: opening Britain's
Empire Preferences to U.S. firms.129 This meant more Persian Gulf concessions to U.S.
members of the Oil Cartel. The United States had helped occupied Iran evict Russia from
the north in 1947. Jersey Standard was given an allocation of Iranian crude, and Tapline
came into planning.130 Then began the era of U.S. foreign bases. The United States built
one at Dhahran (Aramco headquarters) for $43 million.131 The companies used the
United States again to secure the right of way for Trans-Arabian Pipeline (Tapline).132
   Meanwhile, back in Indonesia, U.S. eviction of the Japanese was not without cost to
Royal Dutch Shell. First, we encouraged the Indonesian rebels. The Dutch fought back.
In 1949, "U.S. pressure on the Dutch, implying a threat to cut off economic aid funds,
and on the Indonesians, who were promised U.S. support, resulted in a new cease-fire."133
    Shell was nationalized; Stanvac survived. Today, U.S.-based firms hold most of the
oil, mineral, timber, radio, and other concessions in Indonesia.134 The Dutch colony has
become a U.S. colony.

4. Fencing the Common Seas
   On the open seas, force plays a third role. There is no cacique to grant a new tenure,
nor any fading imperialist from whom to wrest it. It is a matter of creating tenure from
primordial chaos, of which there is still a good deal in places like the South and East
China Seas, Persian Gulf, and Mediterranean. Even the civilized North Sea is without
unequivocal boundaries ratified by treaty.
   In such conditions, naval power means much. Peking is not among those contesting
the North Sea. Absurd? Not really more so than U.S. firms drilling in the East China and
Yellow Seas, legitimized by dealings with client states South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan,
sheltered by the 7th Fleet, and fortified by ping-pong diplomacy. Jersey Standard, the
company named for an island, pops up with refineries and associated tenures on islands
                                                                                           19

everywhere, including Okinawa. This worldwide insularity gives it a special interest in
the doings of the U.S. Navy.
   Priority also means much. Even without much power, Hawaiian Polynesians, U.S.
Indians, and now Alaska Eskimos have won title to large and occasionally valuable lands
based entirely on the homage, cloaked as altruism, that property owes to priority. Spain,
Portugal, Holland, and Britain retain large properties from their former empires, even
though their present forces could never win or hold them.
   This lends urgency to U.S. firms racing for position in turbulent areas. The Soviet
Navy is growing bolder. Japan is threatening a comeback. Peking is disputing the
Senkaku Islands and ordering "swamp buggy" shallow water drilling rigs from
Singapore. To the experienced appropriator of unfenced resources this all shouts, "Now!"
Take while you can. Establish position. Following that, you can defend your tenure with
the self-righteousness of a widow being evicted on a winter's night. Sanctity, legality, and
morality will be yours, for that is the way of the world.
   Insecure tenure of the ocean floor discourages investment in improvements that others
might exploit. But there is also capital whose function is to exploit the resource and
exclude others—fishing boats, for example. Unfenced resources get oversupplied with
such exploitive capital. Economists have lately rediscovered Arthur Young ("The magic
of property turns sand into gold"), and it is now reestablished that the fate of the
commons is not abandonment but overuse: underimprovement, perhaps, but
overexploitation, certainly.
   The Herring Wars of the past are a minor issue today. The Tuna War with Ecuador is a
pinprick, and a sort of aid for Ecuador since the Tuna Fishers' Association has lobbied
through a law that the United States pays their fines. The big prizes are the minerals
under the ocean floor. The exploitive capital being applied is outlay on discovery plus
whatever minimum production is required to confirm one's presence. The motive is to
establish tenure.
    This motive is stronger than the fisherman's, who only salts away today's haul within
his wooden walls. The successful prospector secures the entire resource. Given naval
support, discovery converts common into private tenure. This supercharges the incentive
to invest in exploration.
   Economists have established that interlopers will overcrowd common lands or waters
until the interloper's average product equals his average cost, reducing everyone to the
same fix, and the net gain to zero.
    A similar force works with discovery, but in more subtle guise, and economists have
not propounded it. After discovery there is tenure, "sand into gold." Overcrowding comes
in the activities that precede and create tenure, notably exploration. Explorers are most
hyperactive where ownership is least certain.
    Private waste manifests itself in two ways at least. The Rule of Capture leads to a
Principle of Comparative Disadvantage. Resources firmly under one's wing may be held
in reserve for future attention. The important thing is to move right under the rival's nose,
as close in as one can get. The more convenient and logical an area is for others, and the
less for our side, the greater incentive to move in when one can and preempt it. Tokyo,
                                                                                         20

Seoul, Pyongyang, Taipeh, and Peking are not likely to reconcile their clashing claims in
the Yellow Sea for some time. What better occasion for U.S. firms to find oil there,
establish a presence, and start trading among rival lessors as they have in the various
Indonesian seas? They are not without backup, dealing with clients of their government
in seas patrolled by the 7th Fleet.
   The other private waste is prematurity of exploration. The principle that overuse
dissipates rent on the commons applies to the high seas during the period before there is
tenure. One does not wait until an area is economically ripe for exploration—by then it is
long gone. Where a rule of capture applies, the time to discover minerals is when the
expected discovery value covers the finding costs. Interloping explorers will comb over
an open area until the entire discovery value is eaten up by exploration.135
   Discovery value today is the discounted value of the future cash flow expected.
Discovery value rises above zero long before the optimal date of use, and evokes
exploratory outlays roughly equal to itself. What looks like rent thereafter is eaten up by
interest on premature finding outlays. Sometimes major explorers avoid this outcome by
respecting each others' spheres of influence, playing the sovereign in a power vacuum. Or
they negotiate leases before rent is dissipated. But there remains a propensity to dissipate
net benefits through inflated and premature finding outlays.
   On top of these inflated private costs there is the social overhead of ocean police. The
private beneficiaries do not count that among their costs. The public cost is enormous,
even though the net private gain after costs may be small, or zero.
   The result of such uncontrolled commitment is overcommitment. One may object that
net gains to U.S. firms are too small to explain much of our huge military budget. That,
however, would be to assume there is a Pentagon benefit-cost analyst with authority over
military deployment. Under Secretary McNamara we did hear a good deal about PPB in
the Pentagon, cost-effectiveness and all that, but the Secretary's measure of benefit was
the body-count—neither moral, accurate, nor relevant. If the Pentagon measures the
marginal benefits of its marginal operations by appraising the value of resources gained
and tenures firmed, it reports only to those especially interested. The domino theory
obviates the need, anyway; every outpost becomes vital to national survival.

5. Global Overcommitment
   In practice it would seem that U.S. firms, at least some, can commit U.S. forces even
though the net gains are small and the military costs gross. The firms are not assessed for
any extension of the military umbrella they may require. They proceed on the basis of
their own gain and cost, treating associated military outlays as free inputs.
    Some caciques, too, have power to commit U.S. forces. Saigon is an extreme case.
Roy Prosterman of the Rural Development Institute is fond of repeating that we could
buy out all the landlords of South Vietnam for two weeks' cost of the war, and while that
may be overdrawn, it gives a notion of how committed we can become to achieve so
little.
   The resulting global overcommitment is now widely recognized, and some hard
choices must be made. One may surmise that the affected firms take an interest in these.
Libya presently is bullying Occidental Petroleum. Occidental has been a troublesome
                                                                                            21

maverick to the world cartel.136 Libya also nationalized British Petroleum, which is trying
to invade the U.S. market, and may be too big for its Queen's Navy, although we will see
the Cartel has reasons for protecting it anyway. Iran and Arabia on the other hand are still
treating their U.S. guests hospitably, at least relatively (all OPEC nations are increasingly
fractious today). Their guests are the leaders of the Cartel, and most influential. Algeria,
which evicted French Petroleum, has compensated Jersey and let her back in, along with
El Paso Gas. The client states of Southeast Asia are still offering more favorable terms—
the majors predominating, and developing a counterweight to OPEC demands. These
facts are not inconsistent with a hypothesis that certain firms are more equal than others
in their ability to commit U.S. force. Neither are the data in Table 1.


         Table 1.              Contributions of Prominent Families to Political
                                             Campaigns, 1968137
                                Number contributing                           Total
         DuPont                          32                              $107,000
         Field                            4                                 39,000
         Ford                             8                                109,750
         Harriman                         2                                 17,000
         Lehman                           7                                 51,000
         Mellon                          22                                298,962
         Olin                             7                                 70,000
         Pew                             11                                213,549
         Rockefeller                     21                              2,070,375
         Vanderbilt                       2                                 12,000
         Whitney                          6                                133,500
                       Total            122                             $3,122,136
         Source: Citizens' Research Foundation


   Although choices are made among those who would commit U.S. forces to serve
themselves, the general pattern is overcommitment. It is the nature of U.S. politics to
promise more than can be delivered, to give away more than there is, especially in the
easy form of contingent liabilities. So long as anything of value is being given away,
everyone wants some and many will find a way.
   The U.S. military gives away international police protection below cost—indeed
free—to selected U.S. firms. As one writer sees it, "Historically, the oil companies
preferred to work without any help, for government support always carried with it the
potential of accountability. And so their appeals have often come in especially difficult
                                                                                             22

situations."138 Their incentive is to lead their interference: get title to resources cheap,
outside the military umbrella, then invoke Pax Americana, playing on the Pavlovian
patriotism and manly stupidity of primitive citizens who respond to slogans and crises.
The companies enjoy the capital gain that follows. It would be hard to contrive a system
better calculated to draw out U.S. forces around the world. "…the prospect that the Navy
may some day have to protect hundreds of U.S.-bound oil tankers from Soviet warships is
creating a 'new' and 'emerging' role for the U.S. fleet, according to Adm. Elmo R.
Zumwalt, Chief of Naval Operations…" "The potential for coercion…is ominous…"
"U.S. officials…also explained the need for an increased U.S. naval presence in the
Indian Ocean, partly in terms of protecting the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf to Japan
and other U.S. allies in Asia."139 There is no end to it.

                               D. Entering the U.S. Market
   If U.S. forces are devoted to securing foreign minerals, either for the nation or for a
few powerful interests, it is natural to ask why some of this mineral wealth is denied
access to the U.S. market.
   Most of it, to be sure, is welcomed here—so long as it is not refined or processed. (We
have preferred to keep pollution at home, although that could change in today's mood).
The list of foreign primary products subject to high import hurdles is short, and mainly
limited to those that compete with domestic owners who are independent of offshore
owners. Some cases are oil, sugar, lead and zinc, tungsten, molybdenum, magnesium,
fluorspar, mercury, ferrochrome, and ferrovanadium. Oil is the largest, and I will focus
on it.
   The oil quota system establishes a two-price system, domestic and world. It forces
overseas owners to sell at the lower world price, and to other countries. For the United
States to deploy and finance large military forces to secure these unwanted reserves
would then entail a contradiction. That is no reason to doubt it is U.S. policy. But the
contradictions are only in terms of the national interest, which may be only incidental.
From the viewpoint of overseas oil interests, the quota system works favorably.
    First, they have the quotas. Some 12.5% of domestic consumption may be imported.
Quotas were allocated originally in proportion to histories of import. Refining capacity
and runs are also considered in the complex formulae, giving inland refiners an interest.
If there were no quotas, world oil would flood the U.S. market and bring prices down to
world levels. Thus the system lets the majors sell a lesser volume at a higher price—
something monopolies like to do anyway. The majors also retain large domestic holdings
which benefit.
   Second, the majors benefit as monopsonists. They are constantly expanding overseas,
and bargaining with local owners and governments. Their privileged entree to the U.S.
market keeps others from bidding as high as the U.S. majors for leases. Continuous
bargaining with older host countries, banded together in OPEC, is also the rule:
bargaining over taxes and royalties. The majors' bargaining strength hangs on there being
a surplus of reserves in situ relative to the volume demanded. Thus they can buy and pay
local taxes on oil under depressed world market conditions while they sell in the rich U.S.
market.
                                                                                          23

   Various reports put the annual value of oil quotas at $5 billion (Nixon Cabinet Task
Force under George Shultz) or $7.2 billion (John M. Blair, former Chief Economist,
Senate Antitrust Subcommittee).140 A tariff, recommended by Shultz, would at least put
this annual tax into the Treasury. The quotas let the oil firms tax the country. Capitalized
at 5%, the quotas are worth $100 billion and up. It may already be too late to undo the
system, once created, without compensating the oil firms for loss of that privilege.
Sanctity, morality, legal justice and responsible constitutional government forbid
expropriation without compensation, as Professor Mikesell has pointed out.
   The key to maximum profit is to acquire petroleum reserves on terms reflecting world
prices, then gain privileged entry to the U.S. market. We have looked at the statics. The
dynamics offer room for further play. Quotas are bound to expand over time. The giants'
way is to acquire world reserves cheap while quotas are tight, then enjoy watching them
appreciate as quotas rise.
   The quota system has several leaks. Residual fuel oil is quota-free, for industry and
power plants. It is as large as the quotas. Feedstock for petrochemical plants is coming
next. Home heating oil is in a special class and would certainly be next if many voters got
cold. The Oil Import Appeals Board can spring some oil for this, and is disposed to do
so.141 Overland shipments are exempt, and there has been a great shuttle going back and
forth across the Rio Grande at Brownsville. Asphalt is non-quota now. Puerto Rican and
Virgin Islands refineries get extra quotas. And so on.
   A large leak is military procurement itself. The same war machine that protects tenure
of oil is also its largest single consumer: the means and the ends of national defense
overlap. Navies have long been large consumers. Britain nationalized and promoted
Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. long ago to secure bunkering for the Royal Navy. Today's forces
are increasingly oil-thirsty: jets, tanks, trucks, choppers, personnel carriers, generators,
space heating, etc., all consume oil, the fuel of greatest mobility. No armed force in
history has used so much oil per soldier as ours, operating on the other side of the world
with the highest capital intensity. If Napoleon's armies traveled on their bellies, ours
move on their haunches, powered by oil. "…with the boom in strategic materials during
the Korean War, Indonesia enjoyed a species of prosperity, with a highly favorable
balance of payments."142 One can imagine what Vietnam has meant.
   The quota system is complex, and petroleum data are complex, so any summary
numbers are oversimplified. Data are in barrels and gallons—dollar figures are harder to
find. Roughly, however, DOD procures one million barrels a day (mbd) of petroleum
products. That is about 7% of civilian consumption, 15 mbd. Roughly half the military
fuel is procured offshore, outside the quota system. For Southeast Asia operations it is
90%.143
    The dollar flow is about $1 billion a year for domestically procured products.144
Offshore procurement is presumably at somewhat lower prices, but information on price
is not easy to obtain. It is necessary to buy domestically unless the offshore supplier bids
at less than domestic plus a 50% premium for freight. That allows for some offshore
procurement above domestic prices, depending on local market condition. Control has
sometimes been loose, and there is suspicion of overpayment through partial delivery.145
Owing to the secrecy requirements of defense operations there is scope for overpricing
                                                                                          24

without adequate audit, outside the Services themselves. AID has a reputation for paying
posted prices when no one else does. An investigative reporter could probably have a
field day with oil procurement, but that is beyond the scope of this work. Senator Owen
Brewster, Chairman of the Senate Investigation of the National Defense Program,
calculated that Aramco had overcharged the Navy $38 millions, in l945—that was more
money then than now.146 Navy representatives were "oilmen in uniform."147 Let me
simply point to the possibility that this sort of thing may still go on.
   Military-related fuel consumption by civilian contractors is not in the Defense oil
budget. Airlines with contracts to ferry troops across the Pacific consume much jet fuel,
for example. It would take a dissertation to add it all up. The sum would be large.
   Future leaks and bursts are certain. Fifty percent of oil from abroad by 1980 is now a
common forecast. So long as the oil-auto-highway juggernaut keeps us pouring tax
money into concrete, subsidizing urban sprawl, undertaxing automobiles, breathing
monoxide, tolerating oil spills, and pandering to Geschwindigkeitslust and
Geschlechtsphantasterei, [love of speed and Freudian fantasies] oil owners can look
forward to expanding demand and quotas. As quotas expand they will, being political, be
based on financial strength—not overtly, of course, but via some plausible surrogate like
capacity to import and refine. Those who can finance excess capacity ahead of need will
continue to dominate the quotas. Privileged entry to the U.S. market means in effect
privileged use of the power of U.S. forces abroad which secure resource tenure, for the
value of that tenure is multiplied for those who can sell at the higher U.S. price.
    Privileged United States entry may substitute for and be used to reduce military
outlays, when controlled by State (or whoever is directing our foreign policy now) for
that purpose. Sugar quotas are an intense form of suasion, and potential expropriators of
all foreign assets are deterred by knowing they would be denied the richest market. Oil
quotas, however, belong to the industry, which allocates them among nations as it sees
fit. This aspect of U.S. foreign policy has been delegated to very competent hands, but it
is likely that the hands serve the nation only as the nation serves the Cartel. The nation
serves the Cartel by policing the world with a view to industry well-being.
   Another kind of entry to the U.S. market is in provisioning troops around the world,
and renting out bases. The United States has 400 or so military bases outside its territory,
in 64 countries.148 Foreign caciques hunger after them, for the same motives as
Fayetteville, N.C., and Junction City, Kansas.149 But the caciques prize them even more.
They get rents for the bases, instead of losing taxes, and they get survival insurance.
Franco, for example, having received a few billions in U.S. aid and Ex-Im loans as base
rental from 1949-67, raised the rent in 1968 to include more money and a defense
guarantee.150 Franco is in the process of allocating offshore oil leases, U.S. firms being
primary recipients.151
   Privileged entry in the U.S. market is best, but entry into other markets is also
interesting. U.S. force and associated aid are useful. P.L. 87-l95 provides: "The agencies
of government in the United States are directed to work with other countries in
developing plans for basing development programs on the use of the large and stable
supply of relatively low-cost fuels available in the free world."152
                                                                                        25

   That follows the Marshall Plan tradition. ECA and MSA aid in Europe, Howard Ellis'
"Economics of Freedom," was used to foster dependence of Europe on oil controlled by
the Cartel.153 Cartel members got the refineries and market shares.154 Most of the oil
came from the Persian Gulf, but the reins of control were not held there, as Iran learned
when the CIA overthrew Mossadegh after he seized the Abadan refinery. Entry to
European market was controlled by the sisters. It is interesting to speculate on how long
the nations of Western Europe would tolerate being exploited by foreign firms in the
absence of their dependency on U.S. force, and associated aid.
   Japan depends on the U.S. Navy, having lost its own. Gulf and Esso have been given
privileged entry as part of the return of Okinawa to Japan: a refinery on Okinawa, joint
ventures with Japanese firms, and an import quota.155 U.S. forces are to remain on
Okinawa.156 U.S. oil rigs are moving into Japan's territorial waters.157 The U.S. Navy is
shepherding Persian Gulf oil to Yokohama, and one may surmise it is not doing it only
for the welfare of Japan.
   Large influential firms do not fear the quota system. They control it, in nice
orchestration with their influence on the military.

                            E. Maintaining Cartel Discipline.
   There are two levels of tenure control. One is the power to exclude others from a
single small resource. It is what "tenure" normally means.
    It is socially useful. Without it, a flood of interlopers invade rentable lands, and
stumble over each other until no net gains remain to any user of the resource ("C" in Fig.
1).




  That is, the Average Product of any input is reduced to equal its Marginal (usually also
Average) Cost. The resource yields no surplus, or rent.
                                                                                          26

   Open range, open fisheries, open prospecting territory, open parks, and city streets
thus lose their net value through overcrowding.
   Imposing tenure control, the rational manager notes that an added, let us say, head of
cattle gains the same as all heads, but reduces the others' gains by crowding them. To find
the net gain from adding a head, he subtracts the reduction of others' gains from the gain
of the last head considered individually. This net gain is "The Marginal Product" (MP).
He limits entry to the heads whose MP > MC ("Marginal Cost") and has the range carry
only B head (Fig. 1). He thus creates rent of B*(APB - ACB). Elementary production
economics applauds this as optimal, for the individual and society. It is a legitimate
restriction of resources use and output, so long as costs represent alternative uses.
   The second level of tenure is unified control of an entire market. Now the monopoly
manager notes that an added input adds an output which sells for the same as other units
of output, but reduces the price by crowding into markets. To find his net gain, he
subtracts the reduced revenue on all sales from the gain on the last unit considered
individually. This net gain is the "marginal Value Product" (MVP); it
                    1
equals MP ∗ P(1 − ) where "P" is price and "e" is elasticity of demand. The manager now
                    e
limits entry to the inputs whose MVP> MC, ("A" on Fig. 1). This raises rent further yet,
reduced volume being overcompensated by higher price. Elementary price theory decries
this as antisocial. "Crowding markets" is not a real social cost like crowding resources.
Restricting use to "A" redistributes income from buyers to sellers at a net social cost.
    Elementary price theory usually understates the social cost by assuming that the
excluded resources go into alternative uses. It does this by using output rather than input
as the independent variable and treating all inputs as variables, part of "Marginal Cost"—
a technique so familiar I do not duplicate it here. This leaves unanswered the question of
what keeps the excluded resources from recombining into new firms to reenter the market
as competitors.
     In Fig. 1 the question has an implicit answer. A key resource, highly differentiated and
specific to the industry, does not go into any alternative use—none at all. It is held out of
any use by underutilization or outright idling. Or if it goes into some alternative use it is
noncompetitive, and under control retained by the monopolist. The monopolist preempts
it, thus preventing the excluded resources—undifferentiated labor and capital—from
reentering independently.
    But the would-be monopolist cannot control price by holding back full use of just one
oil field. Other firms would move in to supply the market he abandoned. He must control
the whole market. There is a world market in most primary products, to control which the
monopolist must control the world.
   "Control the world?" It sounds like science fiction. Yet that is what world cartels have
been attempting, and often accomplishing.
   Time was when a monopolist might just control the U.S. market behind a tariff wall.
But now that resource markets are worldwide, that is not enough. The multinational cartel
leaders must preempt the world's resource base, not so much for use as to preclude
                                                                                          27

competition. This of course adds an element of highest urgency to the motives for early
exploration and preemption. The preemptive motive ranks high in oil exploration.
   "…a company's objective must be to maximize its overall world profit, and (that) this
may require holding an area with the minimum expenditure."158 This helps explain active
acquisition by internationals whose life index is already 45 years.159
   And it adds a new dimension to the question of who benefits from military spending.
U.S. military force used to help gain tenure of overseas minerals is not merely acquiring
property for U.S. firms; it is policing cartels, cartels whose customers include the U.S.
consumer, and the very U.S. forces that protect the cartels. And does this not also help
explain why foreign firms like Shell and BP, old reliable cartel members, fare as well as
they do under the U.S. military umbrella? They are being whittled down, but not nearly
so fast as the might of Britannia.
  One might think that Pax Americana achieved by U.S. tax dollars and conscripts
would mean an open door for many firms in the world. The right to do business under the
American flag is the common property of all citizens.
   And yet anti-trust action based on the 1952 FTC Report, The International Petroleum
Cartel,160 was quashed by demand of the National Security Council in 1953 on the
grounds that it threatened national security. (Nelson Rockefeller was among those
attending NSC meetings, as chairman of the Advisory Committee on Government
Organization.) The operating meaning of "national" security is thus closely identified
with that of the Petroleum Cartel.
   In the Iranian uprising under Mossadegh, "the industry received full backing (of the
U.S. forces) in its economic blockade of Iran…" This meant government sanction for the
private pricing and marketing controls governing the world supply.161 President
Eisenhower, among other things, withdrew AID from Iran and refused to buy Iranian
oi1.162 Finally the CIA moved right into Tehran and overthrew Mossadegh, with a little
help from Iran's 1,000 families. The United States has financed and controlled the Shah
ever since, and as Britain withdraws from the Persian Gulf, is using Iran as U.S. front to
replace her.
   The National Security Council also warned in 1952 that the fall of South Vietnam
would imperil the Middle East.163 In purely military terms, that is hardly credible;
Thailand is bearing up under the prospect bravely, as the Nixon Doctrine substitutes
Cambodian-Laotian bases for Saigonese. But in oil cartel terms, it bears more weight.
Offshore Southeast Asia is a major area of exploration for oil. One large field in
independent hands could set maverick oil floating about the world, and indeed "threaten
the Middle East."
    Policing a cartel means being sure that only cooperative members preempt major
fields by advance exploration and leasing. That means cutting down caciques who get
independent; patrolling and dominating the oceans; and subsidizing exploration by cartel
members. We do all three.
   The nickel market makes a good case. Three firms dominate the world market: Inco,
Falconbridge, and Société le Nickel, with Sherritt Gordon and Hanna adding a bit. A
"uniform price system" is observed. Nickel comes from Canada; from New Caledonia,
                                                                                                28

won by U.S. Marines in World War II; from Guatemala, secured by a CIA coup in 1954;
and the Dominican Republic, occupied by U.S. Marines in 1965.164 Cuban supplies from
Nicaro have been contained, aided by the continuing U.S. embargo.
   Economists have studied cartels for generations. Certain features are well known.
Cartels are plagued by excess capacity. It is their nature. First they retire capacity. Then
they allocate quotas among the members, based usually on a share of capacity. When
demand surges and output can rise, higher quotas go to those who are ready and waiting
to move into the breach, i.e., who have been holding excess capacity. The cartel's high
price-umbrella shelters outsiders who then expand, and so must be brought into the cartel.
They, too, bring excess capacity.
   In case of mineral producers, "capacity" means reserves of the mineral.
   Excess capacity makes cartels extremely vulnerable to an outbreak of competition.
One firm or nation breaking ranks would threaten the entire structure of restraint, for the
maverick would expand rapidly at the expense of others, taking advantage of their
withholding and rendering it worse than futile. In the Iranian case, "the chief threat to the
order of oil was not so much shortages or even nationalization, but rather the possibility
of oil flowing into world markets outside the control system."165 Extreme vulnerability
breeds extreme protectiveness. A world cartel must control the world: it hardly considers
just cultivating its own garden. There is no limit to its need for power and. acquisition,
short of everything there is. Every cartel member needs support, for each is indeed a
domino.
   The domino theory easily captured the U.S. Government, staffed and dominated by
cartel men. The Pentagon Papers show essentially that the Johnson Administration was
not responding to popular will, but sought to manipulate it. The Papers do not show to
whose will LJ was responding. But President Johnson had devoted his career to
promoting oil cartel interests in Congress. As the military became the cartel's instrument,
the cartel mind became the military mind.
    The Pentagon Papers discuss "foreign aid" repeatedly. Its purpose is never
development, progress, improvement, reform, enlightenment, or anything dynamic and
uplifting. It is always "stability" and. "security." It is not military stability: the martial talk
is "provocation strategy," "Operation Rolling Thunder," "Massive Retaliation,"
"brinkmanship," and so on. It is hard to avoid inferring that these policy makers were
obsessed with the stability of property and world markets. What else did they stabilize
and secure?
    Cartels combine not only against consumers, but against suppliers. The oil cartel has a
grave problem with OPEC, awakening to its latent power. To bargain best, the cartel
needs more options, more sellers to play off. "[T]he fact that all of the parent companies
of Aramco have affiliates producing oil elsewhere, has led the (Saudi) government to
avoid demands on Aramco...166 In Indonesia today the multinationals are funneling
billions into acquisition to have "an alternative source of supply."167 David Rockefeller is
reported to have forecast in April, 1970, speaking in Singapore, that the international oil
firms would spend $36 billions, in Southeast Asia mainly, by 1982.168
                                                                                          29

   Generally, oil firms get their best terms when newly arrived. Then the locals are
thrilled to see money, and know little of the value of what they have to sell.
   Equally important, the firms get better terms from less secure governments. Nguyen
Van Thieu cannot ask the moon for leases off the Mekong. How much is his promise
worth? Now that Nixon has been to Peking, Chiang Kai-shek and Chung Hee Park should
be more than receptive to U.S. 1essees. Yet the leases are valuable to the lessees.
Whatever Thieu's prospects, cartel members can respect each other's territories. And no
South Viet government has learned to collect taxes anyway, whatever the levy.169 United
States aid makes up the deficits.
    Off Indonesia, some firms have their choice of more than one government office
claiming jurisdiction, one being "free-wheeling" General Suwoto who pays Suharto's
army from oil revenues. It could be like the good old days in Venezuela or Libya.
Throughout the Java Sea, Banda Sea, Gulf of Siam, Straits of Malacca, Andaman Sea,
Indian Ocean, Bay of Bengal, Makassar Straits, Sulu Sea, Celebes Sea, Flores Sea, Savu
Sea, Molucca Sea, Ceram Sea, Timor Sea, Halmahera Sea, Arafura Sea, Bali Sea, South
China Sea, Gulf of Tonkin, Luzon Strait, Formosa Strait, East China Sea, Yellow Sea,
Korea Strait, and Sea of Japan the shores are lined with competing land powers claiming
title. Most are U.S. client states, and all are susceptible of being played off against each
other. This helps explain the high level of U.S. military and exploratory activity in the
area. The cartel sisters need every card in their struggle with OPEC. The pliant
cooperation of U.S. armed forces deals them aces.
   In extreme cases the State Department can impose unified monopolistic policies on
U.S. corporate subsidiaries, even though these are chartered and located abroad
ostensibly subject to other sovereignty. Notable instances are the embargos of Cuba and
China.170 The Cuban embargo was specifically aimed against Cuba's deciding to proceed
independently of the oil cartel.
   Benjamin Higgins wrote, "…any petroleum company, large or small, faces the forces
of competition which characterize the industry throughout the world… It is this
competitive factor which largely accounts for the dynamic quality of the oil industry."171
Evidence cited above indicates the dynamism of oil has quite a different animus. The
need for cartels to preempt and control is open-ended.
   No one has claimed that Southeast Asia contains vital or strategic or unique materials
for national security. It is just another rich area whose control is needed for cartel
security, at whatever cost to national security: overcommitment of conventional forces
and continual risk, small but finite, of major ICBM confrontations with homeland
survival itself thrown into the gambling pot. Cartels will keep exploring and expanding so
long as they can draw the flag behind them. There is nothing to stop them but a loss of
their power to provoke U.S. intervention on their behalf.

         F. Recoupment of Subsidies through Taxation of Beneficiaries
   Since income from subsidies may add to tax returns, it has been pointed out that the
social cost of subsidies may be reduced by the recouped taxes. In the present case,
however, the subsidy to offshore resource owners is augmented by preferential tax
treatment, nowadays realistically called "tax subsidy." Some preferential treatment
                                                                                          30

applies to minerals as such rather than overseas property as such, but I shall take as a
standard of reference the treatment given to domestic wage earners, not to domestic oil
exploration. This is because so much of the benefits of military spending go to owners of
mineral reserves.
   In a nutshell, the Treasury shares the costs of overseas investors without sharing in the
resulting income. It is a very powerful combination. Some particulars follow.

1. Expensing intangibles
   Most of exploration outlay, the "intangible" part, may be written off as current
expense. It should of course be capitalized instead and written off very, very slowly as
the value of the as-yet-unextracted residual deposit declines. No write-off at all should be
allowed until production begins. On the contrary, the reserve usually appreciates and an
ideal income tax would take a share of this increment. The first few years of production
reduce value little or none, and write off should be equally slow.
   Expensing of capital outlays is in fact full exemption from income tax, even without
other privileges. The Treasury puts up t% of the capital, where t is the tax rate. Any tax
revenue it gets later is just a return on this investment of other taxpayers' money. Since
cartels tend to explore to preempt long before use, the Treasury has a long wait and a low
rate of return. The cartel benefits from the preemption which taxpayers thus help finance.

2. Exemption of accrual
   Minerals appreciate between discovery and use. Offshore, where tenures are turbulent
and cartels preempt, the period is long and appreciation great. This accrual of value is
never taxed, not even after it has occurred and been realized in cash, although tax
neutrality would call for taxation of current accruals much earlier, as they occurred.
   Some say that taxation of production income is sufficient, and taxation of prior
accruals would be double taxation. They are wrong.
   Let V0 be the value of a mineral deposit in place on year zero, the date production
begins. The cash flow imputable to the deposit must cover recovery of V0 plus interest on
the unrecovered value over life—say, 30 years. Only the interest element is taxable
income. V0 is fully deductible at the least. (In practice, much more is deducted under
percentage depletion based on wellhead value and posted price.)
   Tax-depletion of V0 recognizes it as an asset of value that the owner possesses in year
zero. How could the owner have acquired wealth of V0 without receiving any income?
He couldn't. Accrual from discovery value up to V0 is a separate income, above and
beyond the interest on V0 received later.
   On domestic minerals the local property tax, where applied, is a means to tax accruals
during the ripening years. Value tends to rise along a compound interest curve. That
means current accrual is a percentage of value already accrued. The ad valorem property
tax is also a percentage of accrued value, and hence of income currently accruing.
   In practice in the United States, ripening minerals are the most underassessed form of
property, a distinction won over strong competition. Still, they do pay something and are
vulnerable to paying many times more. Under salt water, on the other hand, they pay
                                                                                         31

none whatever. Nor are there property taxes of any account in most of our client nations.
That is one of the rewards for being a cacique.

3. Percentage depletion.
   As to Federal income taxes, accrual is exempt because it is not treated as income, but
V0 is deductible as "depletion." Only in practice, one deducts more by taking percentage
depletion which is not limited to V0. First, percentage depletion is based on wellhead
value which includes lifting costs (also separately deductible). Second, it is a fixed 22%
of wellhead value so long as the well shall yield. Third, it is often based on "posted"
prices, in excess of market value. It can hardly fail to exceed V0.

4. Unrepatriated income.
   A foreign-chartered corporation, even though fully owned by U.S. nationals or
corporations, is not taxable by the United States on income from sources outside the
United States. Thus U.S. corporations set up foreign subsidiaries to receive income from
foreign holdings. The income is not taxable until and unless repatriated.172 Since taxes
deferred are taxes partially denied, this deferral is of great value at the least. It is an
interest-free loan.
   And some income need never be repatriated. Thus a foreign subsidiary might reinvest
undistributed profits for 25 years as the permanent capital of a foreign operation. Then it
may pay dividends earned by capital thus accumulated. The dividends would be taxed,
but they would be income earned by the undistributed profits. The latter themselves
would never be taxed. All the capital value of foreign subsidiaries above the cumulated
value of capital exported from the United States represents prior income that has not been
taxed.
   There are also ways to repatriate funds advantageously. One is a distribution in
complete liquidation, taxable at reduced capital-gains rates.173 Another is a dividend
disguised as a long-term loan to the parent company, tax-free.174
   Use of foreign subsidiaries is less common in oil than manufacturing.175 The branch
form lets them use the U.S. percentage depletion allowance to better advantage.176 A
consolidated income statement lets them expense foreign intangible capital investments
in exploration and development against current domestic income.177
   Under section 931 of the code, investors in U.S. possessions and Puerto Rico enjoy the
same benefits as foreign corporations.178 The resulting flow of capital to Puerto Rico is
large. The Virgin Islands are another beneficiary. A key refinery there adds to the insular
empire of Jersey.

5. Foreign tax credit.
   U.S. corporations owning foreign branches or subsidiaries may deduct foreign taxes,
not from their taxable income, but from their tax.179 This Foreign Tax Credit dates from
1918 (the year Dinsmore Ely invested his life for his country). Until l954, the credit was
limited to the U.S. tax due from the taxing country; since then all foreign source income
may be aggregated, and the only limit is the total U.S. tax liability.
                                                                                           32

   This privilege is reserved to those owning 10% or more of the stock in the foreign
corporation.180 Small shareholders pay on the regular basis.
   Foreign hosts have responded to this opportunity by renaming their royalty payments
as "taxes," eliminating any burden on the royalty payer. In 1949, Aramco paid $48
million in U.S. income taxes. In 1950, King Ibn Saud keyed in with the U.S. law. "Taxes"
on oil companies (Aramco being the only one) replaced "royalties." In 1950, Aramco's
U.S. taxes were 2/10 of a million. In 1955, Aramco grossed $724 millions, paid $272
millions to Saud, netted $272 millions itself, and paid no U.S. tax at all.181 Today there is
great concern over increased demands on U.S.-based mineral holders abroad. But the
added burden falls on the general U.S. taxpayer. The companies simply reduce their other
taxes by the amount of the increase abroad.
   An added wrinkle is the "Tax Sparing" treaty. Under this agreement, by treaty, a
foreign host may lower taxes on a U.S. corporation, but the U.S. Treasury will let the
corporation deduct the unpaid or "spared" foreign taxes from its U.S. tax.182 So far, no
such treaties have been executed, however.

6. Aid to foreign hosts.
    Foreign taxes are not entirely painless. Most of the large oil firms have reduced their
U.S. taxes to near zero, and they could easily find they lacked any more taxes to offset.
Besides, a double-bolted door is safer than a single. So U.S. firms benefit from U.S. aid
to their host caciques because it reduces the need for (and is implicitly conditional on not)
taxing the U.S. firms heavily. Actually, we should view the two together: the Foreign Tax
Credit is a form of aid, and aid is a form of tax relief, and both are part of an overall
policy calculated to minimize tax burdens on U.S.-based corporations owning resources
and enjoying our military umbrella overseas.

7. Devaluation increment.
   A large bonus to holders of offshore resources came from dollar devaluation. Since
devaluation was accelerated by capital outflow and domestic deficits, and preferential tax
treatment of offshore resources raises both, devaluation is a kind of surtax on domestic
capital vis-a-vis offshore capital.

8. Selection of tax domicile.
   Corporations subject to multiple tax rates on different stages of vertically integrated
operations have become skilled at shifting profits to the stage of lower tax rate by rigging
posted prices and other prices used for internal accounting. Multinationals have added
options among the various countries they inhabit, which of course they use to lower their
overall tax liability. The usual pattern is one of shifting profits to the extractive or
shipping stage. In international affairs, that means shifting them overseas.

9. "Western Hemisphere Trade Corporations"
   "Western Hemisphere Trade Corporations" pay a reduced rate of 34% on profit.183
Many of these preferences overlap, and are alternative rather than additive. No doubt
there are others not listed. DISC treatment (Domestic International Sales Corporation),
                                                                                           33

recently enacted, could develop into a new preference luring capital offshore. The
important thing is the availability of many options and lines of defense for overseas
investors avoiding taxation.
   The Interest Equalization Tax of 1963 appears like an exception. This tax applies a
higher rate to foreign source income. However, it applies only to portfolio investments,
not equities. It is the equities that gain primarily from military spending. For them, tax
preference is the rule. Portfolios are the small man's foreign investment. Interest
equalization used them to take the heat off the larger investor; the latter could continue to
buy abroad in anticipation of dollar devaluation.
   Enactment and acceptance of these preferences have moved under high phrases like
Postwar Recovery, Reconstruction, Economics of Freedom, promoting Free Trade,
Economic Development, Take-off, and sharing with the world's poor. We have shared,
but not with the poor. We have arrived at total failure to recoup from the major
beneficiaries of military spending.

                       G. The Insubstantiality of Other Benefits
   I have focused on offshore property owners as chief beneficiaries. Many other classes
are believed to benefit from military spending. Let us review them briefly.

1. Labor

   a. The frontier thesis.
   Many view our world expansion as an extension of the old frontier. Occupying new
virgin resources is a safety-valve for unemployed U.S. labor.
   But our frontiering is no longer labor-using, it is capital using. Americans do not
migrate abroad in large numbers. We do bring primary products in, which some would
equate with settling new lands. But:
           i. Cartels skim off much of the benefit.
           ii. Cheap foreign primary products, even if they are a reality, do not necessarily
add to demand for labor at home. In their absence, we would produce more at home,
under more labor-using conditions. To subsidize the use of cheap foreign primary
products, as we do, is to subsidize substituting resources for labor.
   An example is the labor that might be used in recycling, let us say, copper or
aluminum. Recycling is labor-intensive. Infusions of foreign aluminum are resource-
intensive. The mineral resource they use is foreign, but refining in the U.S. uses
important domestic resources. One is fuel. Industry uses half or more of all electric power
generated in the United States, and processing minerals and chemicals takes half the half.
Another is environment. Pollution from refineries and power plants in effect arrogates for
waste disposal part of the service flow from the polluted lands. It makes the lands
inhospitable for people more than for capital, thus reducing the human intensity with
which they are used.
   There is a theory of equalizing nations' resource endowments through international
trade: U.S. labor would benefit by importing primary products, just as it would benefit by
                                                                                           34

occupying the western frontier. Historical revisionists of the "fifties," however, brought
out that labor's benefits from conquering frontiers depend on whether frontiering is labor-
intensive or capital-intensive.
   As noted, our offshore mineral frontiers are capital-intensive. They soak up and hold
capital which is recovered slowly, depriving domestic labor of adequate fast-turning
capital, the kind which most complements labor, Mining is the least labor-intensive of
industries (other than transport and utilities). When Fortune annually ranks industrial
corporations by assets per employee, mineral firms always lead the list (even though they
underreport asset values). That is because they hold assets so long between acquisition
and exhaustion,184 a trait magnified by cartel machinations.
   The capital which offshore mineral industries soak up may be produced in the U.S.
Mining machinery and equipment is indeed an important export, and specialized U.S.
personnel dominate exploration and mining worldwide. But that is to miss the point.
Capital-intensity means that most of the industry output represents value added by capital
and resources, and most factor payments go as interest and rents, not as wages. That
characterizes overseas expansion because of the long lag between input of effort and
output of ripe products.

   b. The underconsumption thesis.
   Another popular notion is the Marxist-Leninist idea of underconsumptionist
imperialism. Marx and Lenin emphasized a search for markets overseas. That thesis is
refuted by ga1loping inflation in the United States today. Consumer demand is stronger
than supply. Rather than needing to generate purchasing power in the United States
today, we need to satisfy the excess demand we already have, and find other ways of
employing men.
   There is still an urge by monopolies and cartels to secure privileged entry to foreign
markets. This is a completely different motivation, but it is probably the source of much
behavior that inspired and continues to feed the underconsumption thesis. In the 19th
century, Europeans settling in China enjoyed exemption from internal tolls and duties
levied on native traders.185 It was a tariff in reverse, making life easy for old China hands.
   Today that would be too direct, too offensive. One goes along with the myths of one's
times. Just as cartels will lose money today to preempt minerals for tomorrow, so they
"invest" in future markets by losing money in them today, if necessary, to drive out
competition and establish their future grandfatherhood. In the dirigiste LDCs of today,
with their licensing, market saturation laws, propensity to bureaucratize, and fear of
competition, the road is open to buy one's way into a seller's monopoly.

   c. Military employment.
   Many people are in uniform who might otherwise be competing for jobs, and the
bogies of peacetime depression center around the unemployment of men, especially
veterans.
   The question is not one of aggregate spending. If military spending were less, other
spending, private and public, could be more. Nor do we suffer from inadequate aggregate
demand today, but shortage of ripe supplies to hold down inflation.
                                                                                              35

    The question is one of factor proportions. Is the military dollar more labor-intensive?
If so, it could benefit labor's bargaining position vis-a-vis property. While this would be
only redistributive, it is an effect which our official rhetoric (if not the operating
convictions of our policy-makers) would define as a benefit.
    I see little substance in this view. First, the draft is not a "demand" for labor in the
market sense. It is involuntary servitude, imposed under inequitable conditions by the old
on the young, by women on men, by hawks on doves, by the cunning on the naive, by the
rich on the poor, by insiders on outsiders, by the sick on the healthy, and, under the draft
lottery system, by the lucky on the unlucky. While the slavery is temporary, the conscript
is required to kill and risk death, things not required of slaves. There is clearly a net loss
to conscripts. That is why they have to be forced. That is a big minus in any case for
benefits to labor.
   Second, labor in uniform becomes politically impotent. Congress does not declare any
gentlemanly moratorium on tax law changes when men are distracted by war. Capital
gains for timber, wage withholding, taxation of school teachers' salaries, and removal of
earned income credit are typical changes during World War II.
   Third, if labor is to benefit vis-a-vis property it must be that more labor than capital is
absorbed by the military—that the armed forces are labor-intensive.
    On the surface one can note that the U.S. way in war is extremely capital-intensive, as
the world goes. Elaborate, costly equipment is the rule. Of the 1971 defense budget of $8l
billions, only $21 billions was to pay personnel. The rest goes to defense contractors, oil
companies, agribusiness giants, and so on.
   Of course defense contractors also have payrolls. But they also use capital and land.
To resolve the issues that raises, we must look below the surface and find a more
fundamental concept of what labor-intensity means.
    We do not judge the labor-intensity of, say, housing by the share of building costs paid
to labor. Housing is capital-intensive, because what labor builds lasts a long time, and
yields its services slowly over 50–100 future years. It must be "financed," and the
financier gets most of the income.
   If a house is to last 100 years, and yield a service or cash flow of $1 a year over that
time, its present value at 7% is
                                      1 − 1.07 −100
                                 PV =               = $14.27                                  (1)
                                           .07
   That is, the maximum one would pay to build the house is about $14, even though it
will yield a total of $100 over life. The other $86 is return on investment, shared between
lender and equity investor.
   Some people find it easier to perceive the matter thus. If I borrow $14 and repay it on
the installment plan at 7% over 100 years, the annual level installment is $1; the sum of
payments is $100.
  The $14 capital cost is only partly payroll, too, but even were it all payroll, labor
would get only 14% of what is paid for the house. Actually when we consider the land
                                                                                                              36

and materials in original cost, labor gets much less than 14%—about 1/5 of 14%, or 2.8%
of total factor payments.
    A capital-intensive industry then is essentially one where there is a long time-lag
between input and output, between effort and result, between investment and recovery. It
is one where the early inputs must be financed over long years before pay-off.
    Viewed this way, as a social investment, how fares the military enterprise? Recall that
it yields no consumable output. It is a police cost to maintain and expand land tenure. The
value of the service has a crude measure in the value of land newly acquired, plus some
share of the annual net income of lands acquired in the past.
    As to lands newly acquired, the military product may be their present value, but this
value is not consumable. It is the present value of remote future services. The assets of
U.S. nationals and allies are increased, and this is to them a form of current income, it is
true. But the income is frozen in the most durable form, so that even if we regard the
entire present value as the product of (military) labor, the return to property over time
will dwarf the labor input, just as with housing, only more so. Besides that, of course, the
initial military input is not even financed by the benefiting property owner, but by U.S.
taxpayers and bondholders.
    Some lands acquired have paid off quickly, like Arabian oil. The U.S. Treasury has
not been paid, but Aramco has. But at the margin, payoff is slow or nil. Land is the most
durable asset, and usually its present value derives from future services anticipated to be
higher than current ones. In addition, we have seen that there is no benefit-cost analysis
in the Pentagon, and many incentives for influentials to lead the flag into deep waters
where national police cost is many times greater than the present value of resources
acquired.
   Acquisition of new resources by force tends therefore to be a capital-intensive
operation, financed by taxpayers and underpaid draftees. Benefits to anyone are long
deferred; and tax recoupment, if any, even more so.
   A hint of the capital cost is interest on the national debt. In 1969 that was $16 billions,
or 76% as much as the payroll for military personnel ($21 billions). If the entire
investment in war had been debt financed, that alone would make this a capital-intensive
industry, as industries go. But most of the investment has been financed from current
taxes, and the interest cost is the imputed capital shot away.*
   Viewed this way, the Defense budget is a sink of national capital. It takes resources
from housing, pollution control, schools, stores, and all capital formation and spends
them to acquire land, whose services are long deferred. By withdrawing capital from
civilian life it raises interest rates, and increases the share of property in national
income.186
   There are those who, like Howard Ellis, describe this as one of the "economic
advantages" to the United States.187 But it is no advantage to labor.


*
 Since 2001, military costs are increasingly financed by overt deficits, making interest costs explicit and
visible. In 2006, they are approaching $500 billion a year.
                                                                                            37

   Returning to the defense contractors, only a part of what they receive results in current
deliveries of materiel. A large share goes for military R&D. At best this is a capital outlay
for future materiel; at worst a sink of waste, graft, boondoggle, and inveigling of
intellectuals. Improving one's bridge game for the MITRE Corporation is not even capital
formation. $6.1 billions went for military R&D in 1960.188 In 1969 it was $7 billion, plus
$4 billion for space research.
   A large element of diversion of funds and waste is built right into it: findings are
patentable by the contractor, with nothing for the financier—the taxpayer.189 The
contractor's incentive is to divert as much R&D as possible into forms that benefit him.
These benefits, too, are deferred. Invention is, as noted, analogous to exploring for
minerals. Each is a form of discovery. The inventor is seeking to discover and gain
tenure of nature's stock of secrets. R&D is thus subject to the economic wastes found
when rivals are searching for oil on a common, like the unfenced high seas: prematurity
and comparative disadvantage. It is another sink of capital.
   From a world viewpoint, of course, force is sterile. The "product" is purely acquisitive
or redistributive—one gets only what others lose. The only net gain might be in creating
security against predators, allowing fuller use of land. But from a nationalistic view this
worldwide sterility is reflected in the principle that what one takes by the sword one must
keep by the sword. Other nations will naturally react to our expansion and apply
counterforce, as they are doing. That means the full value of lands acquired in this year
cannot be credited to this year's budget. There is a continuing commitment to police—
one of those contingent liabilities so easy to promise, so painful to deliver. This is a
recurring yearly expense to be charged against annual income rather than capital value. I
do not know what share of the Defense budget should be allocated here, nor, I surmise,
does anyone. Admiral Elmo Zumwalt is currently campaigning to increase the naval
budget to protect us against the "ominous" threat of "coercion" applied against the world
fleet of oil tankers. Whatever the amount, it reduces the net national pay-off from foreign
resource holdings, further delaying the recovery of national capital invested in military
budgets.
   This kind of accounting needs to be developed and used to guide defense spending.
PPB and body-counts and game theory are not going to save us from national bankruptcy.
But the present point is that the military enterprise is not labor-intensive, it is capital-
intensive because of the long lag between effort and result. Lags have to be financed. The
lag is financed by taking capital from other uses. Lenders may benefit by this. Labor
certainly loses.
   AID programs may be interpreted the same way. They are a promotional investment,
giving out free samples of U.S. exports to create future dependency. The taxpayers
finance the investment, but do not share in the payoff, if any. On the contrary, AID
programs have been used to establish an "American presence" and a proprietary interest
in marginal nations to expand our contingent liability to police the world, imposing costs
on taxpayers.
   To fortify the point, the non-military aspects of territorial expansion are also very
capital-using, and in the same sense, there is a lag between labor and results. Urban
sprawl today is highly capital-intensive. Continental sprawl in the 19th century frontier
                                                                                               38

days was too—canals, railroads, land clearing, county trunks, fencing, drainage,
irrigation, wharves, terminals, new cities, all these paid out in trickles over generations,
not right away, often not at all.
   Now it is world-wide sprawl, with the same kinds of infrastructure needs, requiring
long-term financing, which our banking-governmental establishment is assiduous to
supply. As Equation (1) shows, long-term financing means capital-intensity. It doesn't
mean much that U.S. labor produces the steel, or generators, or drilling rigs. American
capital finances them, and they are capital-intensive.

2. Consumers
   One can easily portray United States control of foreign raw materials as a boon to U.S.
consumers. One can imagine that U.S. forces are making the world safe for free trade, to
secure the gains of specialization and comparative advantage, registered in cheap
imports. It would be an excellent thing. But it is not really the idea.
   The emphasis, as shown, is not on simple competitive trade but on acquiring tenure to
resources and privileges, and suppressing competition.
   Few would argue, other than ex parte, that cartels intend or act to benefit consumers.
Yet U.S. policy is built around cartels, as shown. The premium price of oil maintained
inside the U.S. quota wall indicates where the consumer stands, and the silencing of the
FTC by NSC epitomizes the military's role.
   Even so, could not Pax Americana raise world efficiency through international
specialization? It is a good thought, but too fuzzy a picture not to be misleading.
   Pax Americana is more to be likened to urban sprawl, on a global scale. Urban sprawl
means that developers leapfrog over empty land near in and build far out, pulling social
overhead capital along behind them, subsidized by milking the center. Global sprawl
means we underutilize resources in the continental United States. Prospectors leapfrog
overseas, pulling the United States flag behind them. They find some rich mines out
there, just as centrifugal urban land developers find lovely view lots, lakes and trees. But
the whole process is heavily subsidized by milking the heartland. There are elements of
optimal international trade, but they should not blind us to the forced, uneconomical
directions given by taxes and subsidies. The resulting patterns of trade are not natural, but
preternatural. They do not increase welfare any more than we have raised urban welfare
by moving everyone farther apart so they must drive farther to accomplish the same ends.
Transportation interests benefit, but only at the expense of everything else. The social
overhead cost of international transport is not charged in price. The largest part of that
overhead is the military budget.
   The net result of pumping spending into an enterprise that yields no output until much
later, or never, is to inflate consumer prices, adding a new form of tax to the others that
finance the military. It is no boon to consumers.

3. Taxpayers
   There was a time when Roman generals returned home to victory parades with slaves
and spoils, and foreigners paid the taxes of Rome. Under modern imperialism, the
                                                                                          39

dominant power pays taxes for the colonials; and the average domestic taxpayer pays
taxes for the internationals, as already shown above.

4. Military contractors
   A generation has been reared in the faith that spending makes the world go 'round, so
we all benefit from defense contracts. If the idea ever fit the facts, it does not now.
Defense spending comes either from taxes; or from reducing other spending on
consumption or investment; or from new borrowing, reducing other investment; or from
new money, which is either another form of debt instrument or, more likely, raises prices.
In the world of inflation-with-unemployment, all the old knee-jerks must go. Military
spending does not increase aggregate spending much; and there is no longer any gain
from increasing spending, as such, anyway.
   That means that benefits to contractors are partial, they are taken from others.
Particular firms and regions gain; others lose. The gainers are vocal and organized into
weapons constituencies. The care and feeding of Lockheed shareholders and employees
has become an end in itself, as much as a means to defend the nation. AID has become
part of the farm price support program designed to make U.S. consumers pay more for
cotton, wheat, rice and milk. Ernest Fitzgerald, the Pentagon cost analyst who unturned
the C-5A cargo aircraft cost overrun, becomes a Pariah and is fired. Mendel Rivers'
indifferent district around Charleston becomes a major arsenal of the nation. Scores of
generals retire into the waiting arms of contractors they have been dealing with. Caciques
grow wealthy overnight, Saigon being more typical than exceptional. Senator Allen
Ellender of the Appropriations Committee sees that Food for Peace money is used to buy
unwanted, overpriced U.S. rice for export to Southeast Asia, which remains a rice surplus
area in spite of the war.190
   If in this there is a net benefit to the nation, it must be that those who gain are more
meritorious than those who lose. The most evident distinction between military
contractors and other businesses is that the former are larger. Influence goes with size. In
addition, government purchasing agents ease their workload by buying from a few huge
suppliers rather than from many small ones.
   Public business is not very public, so various estimates of concentration vary, but all
are impressive. The Joint Economic Committee said five firms got 25% of military prime
contracts in l964.191 William Baldwin said the top 50 got 66%.192 For l969, Kaufman
presents a lower figure, 68% to the top 100.193 I do not know if this reflects a drop in
concentration or a difference of sources and definitions. The point here is that all sources
indicate extreme concentration.
   There were instances during World War II of the use of war contracts to foster
competition, as in aluminum. Those days are gone. And the power is overriding:
procurement policy is legally superior to anti-trust policy.194
   The choicer plums are more concentrated. R&D contracts, where the contractor may
keep patent rights as a fringe benefit, went 80% to the top 100 in 1959.195 In addition,
regions of heavy dependence on defense contracts and military bases are above average
in concentration. In the United States, Hawaii tops both lists: it is most dependent of all
states on military spending, and its ownership of land and business is the most
                                                                                         40

concentrated of any state. Southern California ranks high in both departments, too. But
nothing matches the dependence of overseas oil on military procurement. We have seen
that offshore DOD oil procurement runs around 4% of domestic use. Imports run 12.5%
of domestic use. Thus the military adds very roughly a third to U.S. demand for overseas
oil—and who knows how much more if we had data on jet fuel used in contract troop
ferrying, etc.? And nothing matches the concentration of the benefits in the hands of the
richest people in the world.
    Another distinction of military contractors is their non-competitive nature. They
operate on cost-plus. They indulge a gold-plated Cadillac syndrome among procurers, so
a new aircraft carrier costs $1 billion, and the F-15 Air Force fighters, now in
development, will cost $10 million each, or 100 times more than the P-47 of World War
II.196 Service bureaucrats do not spend as though they were concerned about national
security: they buy one weapon for the price of five, or fifty. Pentagon procurers give
advance commitments to production of new weapons without having competitive
prototypes. Overhead on idle capacity is passed along in costs.197 Control is weak and
costs escalate wildly. Congressmen and Presidential candidates use their clout to prevent
closings of unneeded bases. Retiring procurement officers move into high positions with
contractors. A 1969 check found 2122 "former top military men working in industry" for
the 100 largest defense contractors.198
    An ominous aspect of military spending is its use to suppress critics and reward the
faithful. Congressman Edward Hebert of Louisiana, Chairman of the House Armed
Services Committee, "has launched a battle to keep the military services from sending
officers to study at universities that have barred ROTC." "Harvard," Hebert says, "is the
No. 1 target… They fight the military more than anyone else." A Committee report says,
"It is morally wrong for the military to spend dollars sending students to a particular
university which has chosen not to cooperate with the military services…"199 Citing
possible loss of $16 million in NASA and Defense Department research funds, Stanford
University President Richard N. Iman rejected the 8-to-l recommendation of a student-
faculty committee to bar military recruiters from the campus placement center."200
Several universities with contracts to advise abroad have done little to dispel a hypothesis
that they are used by the CIA, and, that this influence may reach back into academic
programs and. personnel decisions.
   It would appear, then, that the net effect of military contracting is to concentrate
wealth and. power, and destroy the free market system. Military contracting has proved to
be corrupting, wasteful, inefficient, antidemocratic and. anti-competitive. This is
incongruous with the alleged goal of promoting a free world.

                                       Conclusion
   Defense is not a "public good". The benefits are unevenly received.
   Particular groups who benefit heavily are resource owners in the overseas area we
police. These include caciques, European and Japanese firms, and U.S.-based multi-
nationals.
   U.S. force is especially important to resource owners, because their prime concerns are
tenure, taxes, and. avoiding competition, matters in the domain of politics. "Aggressive
                                                                                           41

imperialism, which costs the taxpayer so dear, which is of so little value to the
manufacturer and trader…is a source of great gain to the investor.201 U.S. multi-nationals
have acquired huge assets overseas. The sources of the assets are less capital flows from
the United States than they are plow-backs, appropriation, and appreciation. Ownership
of these assets is more concentrated than that of domestic assets, high as the latter is. The
assets are heavily concentrated in resources. The owners benefit from U.S. force because
it firms up and. protects precarious tenures and helps appropriate loosely held or
unfenced resources. Private appropriators often lead the flag, securing bargains for
themselves but imposing great costs on the public in the form of contingent military
liabilities. These have grown so large as to prejudice national solvency and. lead us into
dangerous confrontations.
   U.S. force is also deployed in the interests of cartels whose customers include U.S.
consumers and the military itself.
   Recoupment of the military subsidy through taxation of beneficiaries is nil. On the
contrary, overseas investments enjoy tax treatment so favorable as to constitute an
additional subsidy.
   Labor as such does not gain from military spending. Offshore U.S. industry is capital-
using, not labor-using. Access to cheap foreign minerals is not of great benefit to U.S.
labor. The frontier safety-valve analogy does not apply to our present mercantilistic
stance. The Marx-Lenin doctrine of underconsumptionist imperialism is belied by
inflation in the United States.
   As for direct military employment, the military enterprise absorbs more capital than
labor because of the lag between expense and recovery. It is a social investment of
deferred payout, requiring long-term financing. It sucks capital away from domestic uses
of quicker payout and therefore of higher complementarity to labor.
   Consumers do not benefit from foreign trade which is more distorted than facilitated
by military pressures, and they suffer from inflation.
   Military contractors do gain. The gain is not macro-economic and general, but
redistributive. Losses are diffused and hard to pinpoint, hence, under-appreciated. Gains
are concentrated in a few hands, contractors being larger than the average firm. Waste
and corruption abound.
   For most Americans, the benefits of military spending are to be found in reducing it
and reshaping it so as to diffuse the gains, promote national and world security, and
indeed justify calling it a "public good". Perhaps we can yet learn, as the British did not,
from their Nobel laureate's 1897 "Recessional":
         Far-called our navies melt away;
         On dune and headland sinks the fire:
         Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
         Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
         Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
         Lest we forget—lest we forget!
                              42

Rudyard Kipling (1865-1936)
                                                                                                         43

                                                 ENDNOTES

1
 Address at the Gettysburgh College Convocation, April 4, 1959, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959 (Washington, D.C.: 1960), p. 314, cited in Harry Magdoff, The
Age of Imperialism: The Economics of U.S. Foreign Policy (New York and London: Monthly Review
Press, 1969), p. 53.
2 Howard Ellis, Economics of Freedom (New York: Harper and Rowe, 1950).
3 Testimony of W. W. Rostow at Subcommittee on Foreign Economic Policy of the Joint Economic
Committee, Congress of the United States, 84th Congress, 2nd Session, Hearings, December 10, 12, and
13, 1956, pp. 127, 131, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 54.
4 Edward S. Mason, "United States Interests in Foreign Economic Assistance," in The United States and
the Developing Economies, ed. Gustav Ranis (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 1964), p. 20.
5 Of Arawak Indian or Haitian origin, used in former Spanish colonies.
6 W. W. Rostow, The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1960), p. 27.
7 Testimony of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara at Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of
Representatives, Hearings on the Foreign Assistance Act of 1967 (Washington, D.C.: 1967), p. 117, cited
in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 121.
8
 Testimony of American ambassador George Wadsworth in The President's Proposal on the Middle East,
Hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services, U.S. Senate,
85th Congress, 1st Session (Washington: 1957), Part II, pp. 644, 647, 658, 669, 671, cited in Robert Engler,
The Politics of Oil: Private Power and Democratic Directions (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
1961), p. 254.
9
    J. William Fulbright, The Arrogance of Power (New York: Random House, 1966), p. 230.
10
  Robert Scheer, How the United States Got Involved in Vietnam (Santa Barbara, Calif.: The Fund for the
Republic, Inc., 1965), pp. 48-50.
11
     University of Washington Professor Roy Prosterman, oral statements, January 1971.
12
     New York Times, 11 October 1970.
13
     R. Evans and R. Novak, "The Greek Colonels' Friend," Washington Post, 19 September 1971.
14
     Engler, The Politics of Oil, pp. 218-219.
15
     Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 97, based on U.N., Statistical Yearbook 1966.
16
     Washington Post, 19 February 1972.
17
     Washington Post, 22 February 1972.
18
  Mason Gaffney, "Editor's Conclusion," in Extractive Resources and Taxation, ed. Mason Gaffney
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967) pp. 409–413
19
     Gulf and BP share Kuwait.
20
     Harvey O'Connor, World Crisis in Oil (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1962), p. 8.
21
 See Banco Central de Venezuela, Memoria,_1950, p. 36, cited in Charles E. Rollins, "Mineral
Deve1opment and Economic Growth," in Imperialism and Underdevelopment: A Reader, ed. Robert I.
Rhodes (New York and London: Monthly Review Press, 1970), p. 186.
22
  Lawrence B. Krause and. Kenneth W. Dam, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income (Washington,
D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 19614.), pp. 5, 64, 69.
23
     Charles Nisbet, "Transferring Wealth," Southern Economic Journal, 37, no. 1: 93-96.
                                                                                                           44



24
     Krause and Dam, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income, p. 64.
25
  Charles P. Kindleberger, American Business Abroad: Six Lectures on Direct Investment (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1969), p. 7.
26
     Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 222.
27
  "The Great Oil Deals," Fortune, May 1947, p. 175, cited in Raymond F. Mikesell and Hollis B. Chenery,
Arabian Oil: America's Stake in the Middle East (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press,
1911-9), pp. 55–56, n. 31.
28
  Testimony of F. A. Davies in Emergency Oil Lift Program and Related Oil Problems, Joint Hearings
before Subcommittees of the Committee on the Judiciary and Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs,
U.S. Senate, 85th Congress, 1st Session (Washington, D.C.: 1957), Part 2, p. 1469, cited in Engler, The
Politics of Oil, p. 224.
29
     "Nationalization in Part," Time, 24 March 1972, p. 88.
30
     Michael Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969), pp. 45-47.
31
     Ibid., p. 131.
32
  The American Enterprise Association, Inc., American Private Enterprise, Foreign Economic
Development, and the Aid Programs, a Study prepared at the request of the Special Committee to Study the
Foreign Aid Program, United States Senate, 85th Congress, 1st Session, Committee Print (Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, February 1957), p. 21.
33
     Ibid., p. 2, n. 2.
34
     The Milwaukee Journal, 29 June 1971, p. 16.
35
  Leo Model, "The Politics of Private Foreign Investment," Foreign Affairs, July 1967, pp. 640-641, cited
in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 59.
36
     Washington Post, 20 January 1970.
37
 David D. Martin, "Resource Control and Market Power," in Extractive Resources and Taxation, ed.
Gaffney, p. 126.
38
     Gaffney, "Editor's Conclusion," p. 389.
39
     Cited in Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, pp. 130-131.
40
     Gaffney, "Editor's Conclusion," p. 338.
41
  W. R. Ingalls, The Annalist, 23 October 1931, cited in Folke Hilgerdt, Industrialization and Foreign
Trade (League of Nations, l945), pp.47-48.
42
     Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 183.
43
  Testimony of Abraham Chayes, U.S. State Department legal adviser, Satellite Communications-l964,
Part 1, p. 363, cited in Joseph D. Phillips, "Economic Effects of the Cold War," in Corporations and the
Cold War, ed. David Horowitz (New York and London: Monthly Review Press, 1969), p. 197.
44
 The American Enterprise Association, Inc., American Private Enterprise, Foreign Economic
Development, and the Aid Programs, p. 2.
45
  Mason Gaffney, "The Property Tax is a Progressive Tax," Proceedings, 6th Annual Conference, National
Tax Association (in press), Section A, and sources there cited, notes 16-19.
46
  Raymond F. Mikesell, Promoting United States Private Investment Abroad (Washington, D.C.: National
Planning Association, October 1957), p. 23, based on 1950 Census.
47
     Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, pp. 192–193.
                                                                                                            45



48
 U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Business Investments in Foreign Countries (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1960), p. 144., cited in Phillips, "Economic Effects of the Cold War," p. 188.
49
     Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 193.
50
  International Financial News Surrey, 19, no. 9 (10 March 1967): 73–74, cited in Raymond. F. Mikesell,
"The Contribution of Petroleum and Mineral Resources to Economic Development," in Raymond F.
Mikesell et al., Foreign Investment in the Petroleum and Mineral Industries: Case Studies of Investor-Host
Country Relations (Baltimore, Md., and London: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1971), p. 10.
51
 Calculated from mimeographed list issued by the Federal Reserve Board, Overseas Branches and
Corporations Engaged in Foreign Banking and Financing in Operation on December 31, 1967, cited in
Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 73.
52
 Christopher Layton, Trans-Atlantic Investment (Boulogne-sur-Seine, France: 1966), p. 18, cited in
Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 62.
53
     "Why the U.S. Ban on Chrome Was Lifted," Business Week, 27 November 1971, p. 23.
54
     "Canadian Nickel," Business Week, 9 October 1971, pp. 26-27.
55
     "They Also Serve," Newsweek, 27 December 1971, pp. 17-18.
56
  New York Times, 16, 18, 22 July 1958, cited in Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 264; and Tanzer, Political
Economy of International Oil, p. 311.
57
     Washington Post, 22 February 1972.
58
     Kindleberger, American Business Abroad, p. 71.
59
     Ramparts, May 1971, p. 8.
60
  Admiral Leahy, Diary, December 6, 1945, Leahy MSS; Cordell Hull, Memoirs, II, 1600; Roosevelt,
Public Papers (1944–45 vol.), pp. 563–564; and Cleona Lewis, The United States and Foreign Investment
Problems (New York: 1948), pp. 209-211. All cited in Lloyd C. Gardner, Economic Aspects of New Deal
Diplomacy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1964), p. 189.
61
     Same as note 7, p. 114, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 120.
62
  International Development Advisory Board, Partners in Progress (Washington, D.C.: March 1951), p.
46, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 51.
63
     Kindleberger, American Business Abroad, p. 110.
64
     Post Dispatch (St. Louis), 7 September 1960.
65
     Mikesell, Promoting United States Private Investment Abroad, p. 32.
66
     James Loftus, cited in Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, pp. 52-53.
67
  V. I. Lenin, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1969), p.
90.
68
     "The Asian Enigma," Newsweek, 29 November 1971, pp. 92–93.
69
  Ibid.; "Oil in Vietnam," Ramparts, May 1971, pp. 8–10; "U.S. Investors Eye a Postwar Vietnam,"
Business Week, 25 December 1971, p. 28; "Le Tourneau Platforms," Le Tourneau Now, July 1971; San
Francisco Chronicle, 11 June 1971.
70
     Wall Street Journal, 18 April 1967, cited in Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, p. 364.
71
     "Slim Pickings for U.S. Lumbermen," Business Week, 6 November 1971, pp. 48-52.
72
  Henry Gomez, "Venezuela 's Iron Ore Industry," in Mikesell et al., Foreign Investment in the Petroleum
and. Mineral Industries, p. 324.
                                                                                                        46



73
 Raymond F. Mikesell, "Conflict in Foreign Investor-Host Country Relations: A Preliminary Analysis," in
Mikesell et al., Foreign Investment in the Petroleum and Mineral Industries, p. 31.
74
   Raymond F. Mikesell, "Iron Ore in Brazil: The Experience of the Hanna Mining Company," in Mikesell
et al., Foreign Investment in the Petro1eum and Mineral Industries, p. 356.
75
     "Boom in the Andes," Newsweek, 18 October 1971, pp. 104–106.
76
     Same as note 70.
77
  Clarence B. Randall, The Communist Challenge to American Business (Boston: Little Brown & Co.,
1959), p. 36, cited. in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 197.
78
 Mikesell, "Iron Ore in Brazil," pp. 352-354; and Raymond F. Mikesell, "Major Problem Areas," in
Mikesell et al., Foreign Investment in the Petroleum and Mineral Industries, pp. 425, 432.
79
     Mikesell, Promoting United States Private Investment Abroad, p. 48.
80
  Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate, Hearings on Foreign Assistance Act of 1962 (Washington,
D.C.: 1962), p. 27, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 128.
81
     Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, pp. 137-138.
82
     Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, pp. 359–360.
83
  Simon G. Hanson, Inter-American Economic Affairs, Summer 1960, cited in O'Connor, World Crisis in
Oil, p. 100.
84
  Agency for International Development, Proposed Economic Assistance Programs FY 1967 (Washington,
D.C.: March 1966), p. 79, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 140.
85
     Washington Star (Washington, D.C.), 8 December 1971.
86
     Washington Post, 9 January 1972.
87
     Mikesell, "Iron Ore in Brazil," p. 353.
88
  New York Times, 11 November 1963; and Gertrud. G. Edwards, "The Frondizi Contracts and Petroleum
Self-sufficiency in Argentina," in Mikesell at al., Foreign Investment in the Petroleum and Mineral
Industries, p. 174.
89
     Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, p. 355.
90
     Washington Post, 20 January 1972.
91
  Raymond F. Mikesell, "Conflict and Accommodation in Chilean Copper," in Mikesell et al., Foreign
Investment in the Petroleum and Mineral Industries, p. 384.
92
 Hollis B. Chenery, "Objectives and Criteria for Foreign Assistance," in The United States and the
Developing Economies, ed. Ranis, p. 81.
93
     Ibid., p. 87.
94
  Thomas C. Schelling, "American Aid and Economic Development: Some Critical Issues," in The United
States and the Developing Economies, ed. Ranis, p. 150.
95
  Howard S. Ellis, "A Perspective on Foreign Aid," in The United States and the Developing Economies,
ed. Ranis, pp. 54, 57.
96
 Edward Mason, "United States Interests in Foreign Economic Assistance," in The United States and the
Developing Economies ed. Ranis, p. 13.
97
  Max F. Millikan and Walt W. Rostow, "Criteria of Eligibility for Assistance," in The United. States and.
the Developing Economies, ed. Ranis, p. 98.
                                                                                                         47



98
  Mikesell, The Contribution of Petroleum and Mineral Resources to Economic Development," p. 11. See
also Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, p 118.
99
     Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, p. 390.
100
      Ibid., p. 363.
101
   Department of State Bulletin, 10 May 1965, p. 700, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 44;
and. Phillips, "Economic Effects of the Cold War," pp. 191-203.
102
      Same as note 50; and weekly ads in Business Week by the banks ("Your man on the spot in Bangkok").
103
  Statement of Joseph Pa1mer, II, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs in Committee on
Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Hearings on Foreign Assistance Act of 1968 (Washington,
D.C.: 1963), Part II, p. 326, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 129.
104
      Phillips, "Economic Effects of the Cold War," pp. 193–196.
105
      "Comsat's Role in Communications," Signal, May 1967, p. 32, cited in ibid., p. 196.
106
      Washington Post, 17 October 1971.
107
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 218.
108
  Republic of the Philippines, Treaty Series, II, no. 4 (April 1956), cited in Magdoff, The Age of
Imperialism, p. 127.
109
      Vancouver Sun, 10 February 1972, p. 6.
110
      Mikesell, Promoting United States Private Investment Abroad, pp. 48–49.
111
      Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 128.
112
   Washington Post, 15 October 1971. Some different, but not essentially conflicting figures appear in N.Y.
Times, 6 March 1972.
113
   Washington Star (Washington, D.C.), 16 October 1971; "Copper Crisis," Newsweek, 11 October 1971,
p. 77.
114
      Resources, January 1972, p. 15.
115
   Neil Sheehan et al., The Pentagon Papers, as published by The New York Times (Toronto, New York
and London: Bantam Books, Inc., 1971), pp. 432, 492.
116
      Same as note 66.
117
   "United States Foreign Petro1eum Policy," State Department paper, 10 February 1944, submitted for
Investigation of the National Defense Program, Additional Report of the Special Committee Investigating
the National Defense Program, U.S. Senate, 78th Congress, 2nd Session (Washington, D.C.: 1944), Report
No. 10, Part 15, Report of Subcommittee Concerning Investigations Overseas, p. 576, cited in Engler, The
Politics of Oil, p. 192. See also The International Petroleum Cartel, Staff Report to the Federal Trade
Commission submitted to the Subcommittee on Monopoly of the Select Committee on Small Business,
U.S. Senate, 82nd Congress, 2nd Session, Committee Print (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 22 August 1952), p. 51.
118
      Mikesell and Chenery, Arabian Oil, p. 45.
119
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 192.
120
  Benjamin Higgins et al., Stanvac in Indonesia (Washington, D.C.: National Planning Association,
1957), p. 40.
121
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 192.
122
      O'Connor, World Crisis in Oil, p. 17.
                                                                                                         48



123
      Ibid., p. 12.
124
      Mikesell and Chenery, Arabian Oil, p. 54.
125
   Press Conference 614-A, 12 January 1940, The Papers of Franklin D. Roosevelt, Franklin D. Roosevelt
Library, Hyde Park, New York, President's Persona1 File-1P, cited in Gardner, Economic Aspects of New
Deal Diplomacy, p. 126.
126
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, pp. 199-200, 221 ff.
127
  Investigation of the National Defense Program, Hearings before a Special Committee Investigating the
National Defense Program, U.S. Senate, 80th Congress, 1st Session (Washington, D.C.: 1948), Report No.
440, Part 5, p. 338, cited in ibid., p. 222.
128
      Mikesell and Chenery, Arabian Oil, p. 81.
129
   See Article VII of the Anglo-American Financial Agreement, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism,
p. 125.
130
      Mikesell and Chenery, Arabian Oil, p. 43.
131
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 201.
132
      Ibid., p. 220.
133
      Higgins et al. Stanvac in Indonesia, p. 16.
134
      "Indonesia," Time, 22 November 1971, pp. 100–103.
135
   This theme has been developed more formally in Gaffney, "Editor's Conclusion," pp. 382–399 et
passim.
136
      "Occidental Petroleum's Unhappy Ventures," Business Week, 18 December 1971, pp. 79-82.
137
      "The $400 Million Election Machine," Newsweek, 13 December 1971, pp. 23–32, p. 30.
138
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 193.
139
      Washington Post, 23 February 1972.
140
   Washington Post, 9 January 1972; Washington Star (Washington, D.C.), 7 January 1972. Additional
studies for the Joint Economic Committee by Martin Lobel and William Barrett appear at this writing to
have been suppressed.
141
      Washington Post, 6 November 1971.
142
      Higgins at al., Stanvac in Indonesia, p. 11.
143
   Telephone interviews with Richard Matthews, Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installation and
Logistics), and George Williams, Chief of Planning and Economic Analysis, Defense Fuel Supply Center,
Cameron Station, Alexandria, Virginia, 10 March 1972. The farther from home we fight, the higher share
comes from offshore. 90% of DOD procurement in Southeast Asia is from foreign sources.—Cabinet Task
Force on Oil Import Control, The Oil Import Question (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1970), p. 35, n. 30.
144
  Estimated by Martin Bailey, based on data published by Richard Oliver, Monthly Labor Review,
December 1971.
145
  GAO Report #B-163928, "Investigation of Handling and Control of Petroleum Products in Southeast
Asia," 28 July 1970, cited by Martin Lobel, telephone interview, 10 March 1972.
146
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 221.
147
      Ibid., p. 222.
                                                                                                         49



148
  Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 42, from data in Agency for International Development, U.S.
Overseas Loans and Grants, Obligations and Loan Authorizations, July 1, 1945 to June 30, 1967
(Washington, D.C.: 29 March 1968).
149
  Those who question the reality of secondary benefits in benefit-cost analysis of public works might
ponder this. There are no primary benefits from Ft. Bragg and Ft. Riley.
150
      New York Times, 14 July 1968, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 119.
151
      "Oil Men Scramble for Their Share," Business Week, 18 September 1971, p. 35.
152
      Sec. 647.22 U.S.C. 2406, Public Law 87-195, Part 3, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 139.
153
  Wayne A. Leeman, The Price of Middle East Oil: An Essay in Political Economy (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1962), Chapter 5.
154
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, pp. 217–220.
155
      Wall Street Journal, 26 October 1971.
156
      Washington Post, 29 October 1971.
157
      The Milwaukee Journal, 10 April 1971.
158
      E. N. Avery, cited in Tanzer, Political Economy of International Oil, pp. 130-131.
159
      Ibid.
160
      The International Petroleum Cartel (cited in note 116).
161
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 204.
162
      New York Times, 10 July 1953, cited in ibid., p. 205.
163
      Sheehan et al., The Pentagon Papers, p. 27.
164
      Same as note 53. See also Martin, "Resource Control and Market Power," pp. 131-135.
165
      Engler, The Politics of Oil, p. 204.
166
    Donald A. Wells, "Aramco: The Evolution of an Oil Concession," in Mikesell et al., Foreign Investment
in the Petroleum and Mineral Industries, p. 229.
167
      Same as note 133.
168
   Joan D. Schmitt, "Are Our Boys Dying in Vietnam for Offshore Oil," Coronet, July 1971, pp. 11-17, p.
14.
169
      New York Times, 11 October 1970.
170
      Kind1ebrger, American Business Abroad, p. 193.
171
      Higgins et al., Stanvac in Indonesia, p. 28.
172
      Krause and Darn, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income, pp. 6-9.
173
      Ibid., p. 21.
174
      Ibid., p. 20.
175
  Peggy Brewer Richman, Taxation of Foreign Investment Income: An Economic Analysis (Baltimore,
Md.: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), p. 116.
176
      Krause and Dam, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income, p. 13.
177
      Richman, Taxation of Foreign Investment Income, p. 52.
                                                                                                               50



178
   Thomas E. Jenks, "Forms of Organization for Foreign Business Operations in the Extractive Industries,"
in Taxation and Operations Abroad, a Symposium conducted by the Tax Institute (Princeton, N.J.: Tax
Institute, Incorporated, 1960), p. 51.
179
   It is a little better yet. The income taxable by the U.S. is figured after the foreign tax, while the foreign
tax is based on income before tax and is then allowed as a credit against this smaller U.S. liability. Sounds
bewildering, but bewilderment is a vital technique of privilege.
180
      Before 1951 it was 50%.
181
   Same as note 28. See also 1956 Report of Operations to the Saudi Arab Government, Arabian American
Oil Company, 1957. Also, Congressional Record, 85th Congress, 1st Session (27 March 1957), pp. 3981-
3982 and The International Petroleum Cartel, p. 128. All cited in Engler, The Politics of Oil, pp. 223–224.
182
   Richman, Taxation of Foreign Investment Income, p. 55; and Mikesell, Promoting United States Private
Investment Abroad, p. 56.
183
   Krause and Dam, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign Income, pp. 7-8; and Richman, Taxation of Foreign
Investment Income, pp. 53–54.
184
   For a model showing the identity of slow turnover with high capital-intensity, see Gaffney, Editor's
Conclusion," pp. 342–348. To those who see the point, this relationship is so obvious that it is patronizing
to explicate it. Yet half of all economists, in my experience, do not see it at all. A few deny it vigorously, in
the tradition of Frank Knight and J. B. Clark.
185
      Fullbright, The Arrogance of Power, p. 143.
186
    Some of the budget comes from current consumption, rather than investment. Space forbids exploring
all the questions this leads to. Loan-financed spending, reflected in the national debt, comes directly from
other capital.
How much of current taxation is forced saving—who knows? In general, however, our practices assure that
a large share of the military outlay will dig into capital formation. One practice is debt-finance of national
spending. U.S. securities satisfy the demand for assets and so weaken the motive to hold real assets. The
other practice is acquiring land itself.
The rationale is the same. Land values are an asset that substitute for real capital, and weaken the urge to
create real capital.
187
      Ellis, "A Perspective on Foreign Aid," p. 56.
188
   Charles E. Nathanson, "The Militarization of the American Economy," in Corporations and the Cold
War, ed. Horowitz, p. 224, based on National Science Foundation, Funds for Research and Development in
Industry (1960), p. 11.
189
   Alfred E. Kahn, "Public Policies Affecting Market Power," in U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Antitrust
and Monopoly, Administered Prices: A Compendium on Public Policy, 88th Congress, 1st Session,
Committee Print, pp. 173–174, cited in Estes Kefauver, In a Few Hands: Monopoly Power in America
(Baltimore, Md.: Penguin Books, 1965), p. 230.
190
      "Tempest in the Rice Bowl," Newsweek, 12 January 1970, pp. 59–60.
191
  Background Material on Economic Aspects of Military Procurement and Supply: 1964, Joint Economic
Committee of Congress (Washington, D.C.: 1964), p. 11, cited in Magdoff, The Age of Imperialism, p. 192.
192
      Phillips, "Economic Effects of the Cold War," p. 179.
193
   Richard F. Kaufman, The War Profiteers (Indianapolis and New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company,
Inc., 1970), p. 41.
194
   Horace M. Gray, "Supplemental Action to Reinforce Antitrust," in Administered Prices: A Compendium
on Public Policy, p. 149, cited in Kefauver, In a Few Hands, pp. 230–23l.
                                                                                                       51



195
  Testimony of Dr. Richard J. Barber at Hearings before the Joint Economic Committee, 87th Congress,
2nd Session, State of the Economy and Policies for Full Employment (1962), p. 861, cited in Kefauver, In a
Few Hands, p. 229.
196
      "Stopping the Incredible Rise in Weapons Costs," Business Week, 19 February 1972, pp. 60–61.
197
      Ibid.
198
      "A Roll-Call of Colonels," Business Week, 27 November 1971, p. 20.
199
      Washington Post, 19 February 1972.
200
      Washington Post, 9 March 1972.
201
      John Hobson, Imperialism (London: 1902), pp. 59-60, cited in Lenin, Imperialism, p. 120.
