New Life in Old Cities

Georgist' Policies and Population Growth in New York City, San Francisco, Chicago,
Cleveland, Toledo, Detroit, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh, and Other Cities, 1890-1930

Mason Gaffney, emended 10-22-06?

Abstract

In the period 1890 to 1930, the Georgist movement inspired a large number of civic leaders—
mayors, assessors, governors, congressmen and others—to implement Georgist policies in a
number of US and Canadian cities. That is, in order to encourage development, they reduced or
eliminated assessments on buildings and increased assessments on land. They used land
revenues to provide low-cost, high-quality public services. Where implemented, these policies
resulted in rapid population growth.

Contents
INTRODUCTION .........cccccsssssssssssssssssssesssssscsssssssesssssssescssssessssesssessesessesessseesasessssesesssessasessessseseeees 2
I. New York City Reborn, 1920-31 .............scssssssssssssssssssssssesscssssessesssssssecsessesessecsesoesessesseseesesseses 6
A. Al Smith's 1920 Tax Reform Act and its Apparent Effects...
B. NYC’s Success, and its Meaning «0.0.0... eessescececeseeseeececeseeseecseeaceeseesaeeaseeesesseeacnseeeaeeesereaes 7
IL. NYC Under the Al Smith Act ..........ccscssssssssesssscssssssssssessssssssessessssssssssessesssssessesesseseseseesesens 7
A. Sources on the Smith Actos ccsscsesesecscecseessssscsscscsssssssscseesssesesseesseessesssseessesseseesaees 7
B. Political History: The Georgist Factor ..........scsscsssescsecseesseseeecscesceeeeecseeeseecsesseeeseeaeeaceeseeeaes 9
C. Assessment Reform, Silent Senior Partner of Tax RefOrm..........cccccccsssescesecescescsseesesseeees 10
D. The Plenty in Land as a Tax Base .......ccssssssessessecceecseesceeeseeseeeeeceneeaceecsecaseaseeseeaeeeeaeeaeeeseees 11
E. Features of the Law as Applied, Summarized ............cessescsseseseseeceseseeeeeesesceeeeeseeeeeneeeeeeees 12
F. NYC Outstripping Comparison Cities, 1920-4000... eee cesessecsecseeeseesecseeeseeseesaeeaeeeeeaes 13
G. Summary: Effectiveness of the Smith Act .......ccceccssssssesessescseseeseceseeeeeeseseeseseseeeteeseseeeeeeees 15
H. Aftermath wee ccssesesesssesesssssessessesenssessesseeseeseseesseseneseeseseseenseseeesseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeseneeeneeeeees 16

' Henry George (1839-1897) is best known today for Progress and Poverty (1879). For a brief history of Henry
George and the Georgist movement, see "Henry George 100 Years Later: the Great Reconciler" at
http://www.masongaffney.org/essays/Henry_George_100_Years_Later.pdf.

“Yisroel Pensack gave lavishly of his time and talent and editorial experience to upgrade and clarify my prose in
Parts I and II. I am also indebted to the late Robert Andelson, Clifford Cobb, Richard Biddle, Dick Netzer, Jeffrey
Smith, Heather Remoff, Daniel Sullivan, Herbert Barry, William Batt, Nicolaus Tideman, Robert Piper, Robert
Fitch, Wyneth Achenbaum, Michael Hudson, Joshua Vincent and Ed O’Donnell for editorial and substantive
corrections and additions, most of which I have used. My greatest debt is to Mary M. Cleveland, whose holistic
mind, encyclopedic knowledge, and conscientious prodding, reaching across a continent, have guided me to
integrate the parts into a coherent whole. I bear sole responsibility for the final product.
TI. Growth Spurts in some Other Cities ..............csccsssssscssssssssssessessssessessesessecsessssessessessesessers 16
A. Cleveland, 1900-20 .......ccccccssccsssccssccssscesscessecesecessecesscessecesscessecesscessecesscessecesssesseceseesseeenee 16
B. Detroit, 1890-1930 00... eeesceescesseececcseeseeeeseescescsceseessencsecseeeesesseeacassesseeeeeesaeeaeeeseeeseeacenseees 17
CG. Toledo, 1890-1920 ...... eee esceessesseeceecseeseeeescescescsceseesseecsecseceesesseeaceaseesaeeaeeesaesaeeesereaeeaseneaees 18
D. Milwaukee, 1916-40 0... eescesseececcseeseeeecescescecesecseacseeseeseecseeseeacsesaeeaeeaseeeaeeaeeeseeeaeeasenes 18
E. Chicago, 1890-1930.........sesceccssessecceeesesseescscesceecsecseeeseeeseeseeseeesceacecsaesseeeeeeeeeaeeesaeeaseaserenees 19
F. San Francisco, 1906-30..........ceccsssccesssscceessccccesseecesseecceesseeccesseecesseeeeeessecccesseecessseeesesseeeeesee 24
G. Cincinnati, Ohio politics, and Decadence, 1890-2000...........ceessesseceeeceeeeeeeseeseeeeeeeaeeeeeees 26
H. Are Pro-labor Mayors Bad for Business? ...........:csccssssseceseeseeceeeeseeceeeeseeaceeeeeaeeeeeeeaeeaeeneeees 28
I. The Puzzle of Pittsburgh..........cccesceseesessesesessesesesescecesesecesescseceeseseeeeseaeseeseaescceseseeeeseseeeeeeas 29

TV. L’ Env) .........ssscscsscscsssescesssssssesscsessecscssssessesssssssecsessssessessesessessessssecsessssecsessesossessessssecsessesesoess 30
TABLE I: Populations, NYC and Comparison Cities, 1890-2000, Ranked by 1900

POPUMATIONS...... eee cece eessescesceeeseeneeecseeseeceseesceaceceseesseseeeaeeassceseeaceceaceseesaesaeseseeeseeaceceaeeaseeserees 31
APPENDIX I: Hauser on Methods of Social Ostracism............:cscsssssssseseeseseeeseeceseseeeeeeseeeeeees 36
APPENDIX II: Questions wanting further research, ..........ccssecceeseeeeeeeeeseeseeeceeseeaceeeseeeeeeeees 37

Bibliography .............csscsssssssscsssesscsecsessecsesessessessssessessesessecsessssessessssessesseseesecsessssessesseseesesseseeseeses 38

INTRODUCTION

“History ... is the biography of great men” - Carlyle

Some cities have grown in notable spurts. Some of these cities were new; others have revived
after decaying. Cities' cells, like ours, metabolize and can refresh themselves constantly. Cities
need not die like us. They can continue this cycle of renewal forever, when people remodel
buildings and clear and renew sites. This can happen even after periods of sickness and senility.
Given the will, it also takes some skill with public policy. We can learn the skill from the history
of growing and reviving cities.

The dynamics are bent by free will, not just iron laws of geography and history. True, they
deal with economics and numbers and tax policy, with self-seeking employees and home-buyers
and merchants and manufacturers, with simple motives and narrow outlooks. Yet the evidence
keeps bringing us back to the impact of idealistic leaders, and the power of their ideals to move
others, prevailing over and working with "destiny" and greed and myopia and technical details.

There was a telling episode in New York City, 1920-32. Its leaders exempted new residential
buildings from the property tax, while maintaining the tax on land values. As current land prices
rose, which they swiftly did, the land taxes rose in step. There ensued a notable surge in building
and population, unmistakably linked to the tax policy. National population data disclose,
however, that New York was not the only city to have boomed or revived suddenly. What was
remarkable about New York, that we should be mindful of it?
Jane Jacobs has pointed out that cities grow "explosively" during periods of special vigor.
She brilliantly described the private-sector process of import-substitution. However, she put such
an anarchist spin on it she overlooked the positive role of political leaders, and tax and spending
policy. When we find high growth rates in the data, we also find, more often than not, a pro-
Georgist or fellow-traveling movement, Mayor, Council and Governor. We also find ports,
parks, public schools, low-fare mass transit, social welfare, public plumbing, bridges and tunnels,
public health programs, and so on, making a city attractive for people and profitable for business.
We find public works and services provided without heavy taxes on private commerce, labor,
and buildings, which also make a city livable and attractive. This was the promise of Henry
George, and it seems to have come true in many places during this, the Golden Age of American
and Canadian cities.

To the extent that historians have noted this phenomenon it has been one city at a time.
Robert Bremner's title, George and Ohio's Civic Revival, might give the impression that the
action focused on Ohio; publicity about Pittsburgh, and more recently Harrisburg and Allentown,
would make Pennsylvania the focus; a study of Henry George's origins leads us to San
Francisco; and so on. But studies of one place at a time mistakenly localize what was a pandemic
movement, 1890-1930. George and Georgists influenced tax policy in many other cities than
New York, and rural areas too. The signature of their influence is the rate of population growth,
reported in the U.S. Census of Population.

Geography and "Historical Laws of Motion" play their roles, and brute economic "forces",
too; but political leaders tip the balance. These may be inspirational, analytical, or political.
Italy's Risorgimento, recall, had its poet, Mazzini, its sword, Garibaldi, its composer, Verdi, and
its brain, Cavour. We find their counterparts who led growth spurts in New York City, Chicago,
Cleveland, Detroit, Toledo, Milwaukee, San Francisco, Vancouver, Portland, Seattle, San Diego,
Houston, Los Angeles, and some smaller cities. These are human factors that "cookbook"
econometric modeling omits. Modern economics, with its mechanistic tools and canned standard
procedures, is the poorer for it. Carlyle's history as the "biography of great men" (and women)
has something to teach us.

To compare one city's performance with others' requires a standard measure, preferably
simple and unitary. I chose population in part because the measure is readily available. Census
data on building, on the other hand, do not go back to the 1920s. Gathering and verifying
building records, city by city, would be a major project, not attempted here. Cord, Tideman and
Plassmann, and Oates and Schwab, have searched building permit records for various
Pennsylvania cities, but the records are non-uniform, hard to interpret, and often inconsistent
with population data.

Population growth is not the only goal and measure of civic performance, it is understood.
Population, however, is a sign of city health, even from the particularistic local view: a thriving
city attracts people, and people, viewed as human resources, help the city thrive. From a larger
view, macro-economists understand that the aggregate effect of having cities vie to attract people
is not to raise the overall national or world birthrate, but is to make jobs and homes, raise wages,
and lower living costs. The converse is also true, with grim results like homelessness and hunger.
It is noteworthy that most cities' growth spurts accompanied provision of vast parks, superior
schooling, mass transit, and other such public goods.
Some cities' growth spurts are complicated by annexations. Chicago in 1889 tripled its land
area (Hoyt, p.153). Detroit quadrupled its area in the 1920's. Columbus' steady growth is
complicated by mergers and annexations that I have not tried to unravel. Milwaukee doubled its
area around 1960, but lost population anyway. I have adjusted for these changes where I could,
or dropped the city from the study.

This rise and fall of growth rates is remarkably independent of external causes, and more
responsive to internal reforms. Thus, the population bursts of Pacific Coast ports preceded the
Panama Canal; the bursts of Great Lakes ports preceded the St. Lawrence Seaway; the collapse
of Detroit accompanied growth of the Interstate Highway System.

This inquiry began with New York City, under its Georgist-inspired plan, led by Governor
Alfred Smith, to exempt new residential buildings—but not land—from its property tax base,
1920-32. The ensuing boom in buildings and population was overwhelming. To get a perspective
I tabulated growth rates of comparison cities. New York raced ahead of the nearest comparables.
However, the data also disclose several other cities with impressive growth spurts. What about
them? Aren't there many other causes of growth?

Inspection revealed the remarkable and telling fact that these spurts occurred under Georgist
leadership, too. Some of these cities and periods are Cleveland, 1900-20, under mayors Tom L.
Johnson and Newton D. Baker; Detroit, 1890-1930, initially under Mayor, later Governor Hazen
S. Pingree; Toledo, 1890-1920, under Mayors Samuel "Golden Rule" Jones and Brand Whitlock;
Milwaukee, under "socialist" Mayors Emil Seidel, 1910-12, and Daniel Hoan, 1916-40; San
Francisco under Georgist Mayor Edward Robeson Taylor, 1907-09, and consensual "Sunny Jim"
Rolph, 1911-30, spurred by activist James Hartness Griffes (aka "Luke North"); Los Angeles
under siege from socialist Job Harriman; Houston under single-tax’ Assessor J.J. Pastoriza; San
Diego under Assessor Harris Moody; and Chicago, 1890-1930.

Chicago leadership is more complex, with its host of nationally prominent Georgists and
fellow-travelers (John Peter Altgeld, Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright, Walter Burley Griffin,
Clarence Darrow, Jane Addams, Louis F. Post, Brand Whitlock, Henry D. Lloyd, Margaret
Haley, Edward Dunne, and others). Pittsburgh, known for its Georgist-oriented property tax
policy, had a building spurt, but no population spurt, making it an anomaly to be examined
below.

Jersey City had a Georgist Mayor, Democrat Mark Fagan, with a redoubtable Georgist
Republican mentor, George Record, off and on from 1900-18. They never grew strong enough to
beat the railroads or dominate tax policy (Tobin, 1974). Yet it was after Fagan that Jersey City
stopped growing, under "Boss" Frank Hague. In the 1920's, New Jersey specifically rejected a
copycat Smith plan (Pleydell, passim).

Vancouver under 8-time Mayor Louis Denison "Single-tax" Taylor went further than any U.S.
city in exempting buildings, and grew much faster. It actually quintupled in population, 1895-
1909, after exempting first 1/2, and then %, and then, 1910-18, all of building values from the
property tax (Marsh, 1911, pp.33-37; George, Jr., 1911; Rawson, 2000; Nixon, p.66). That is the

3 “Single-tax” was a label used in those years for the movement to remove buildings and other capital from the
property tax base, and focus the property tax on land values. The property tax at that time was the mainstay of state
and local finance, so the proposal was more fundamental than it would be today.
fastest growth rate on record. Far from blighting Vancouver, it left it probably the most beautiful
and livable city in North America, perhaps in the world. Emulation of Vancouver was a common
theme in Seattle, Portland, and San Francisco.

There were strong statewide single-tax campaigns in Oregon, led by W.S. U'Ren of Portland,
father of the "Oregon System" of Initiative and Referendum, which he pioneered in the hope it
would pave the way to the single tax. Losing at the polls did not dispose of the issue or dismiss
the protagonists, especially in Portland, where the pro-single-tax vote was always strongest—up
to 49% at one point. The campaigns raised consciousness of the issue and gave future politicians
a well-defined constituency to "fish" for by bending assessment practices in the Georgist
direction. This kind of shading is hard to document, but Professor William McKinley of Reed
College told this writer in 1947 that Multnomah County (Portland) overassessed land relative to
buildings up to 1941. Politicians troll for the votes of any strong constituency; shading
assessments is one way.

In 1912 "the City Council of Seattle, several of whom were single-taxers", submitted a single-
tax amendment to the voters. The Chamber of Commerce weighed in with a proposed 10-year
exemption for industry. The voters said no, but at the same time elected a single-tax Mayor,
George F. Cotterill (Young, p.189). We may reasonably surmise that Seattle, with this kind of
political and business support, also shaded assessments as Portland did, undervaluing new
buildings relative to land.

Houston, under single-tax assessor J.J. Pastoriza, grew by some 25%, 1911-15, until a court
ordered him to go back to the old ways (Geiger, pp.434-35). Harris Moody, assessor in San
Diego, single-handedly used his administrative latitude to convert the property tax to a land-
value tax over several years, 1920-26, until stopped abruptly by court order (Mahoney). At this
point the city skyline froze for the next 75 years (Andelson).

These were not isolated local events; the leaders networked. In Dunne's Chicago, the
principals "were very conscious of being part of a national movement, and they were in close
contact" with Georgist powers in other cities, especially Tom Johnson of Cleveland and Jones of
Toledo (Morton, pp. ix, 8). Johnson had been George's "field commander" (Barker). Mayor E.R.
Taylor of San Francisco had helped Henry George write Progress and Poverty. Pioneer land
assessor William A. Somers traveled busily on loan from Tom Johnson from city to city,
instructing local assessors in his Georgist techniques. Altgeld of Chicago knew and supported
George, and boosted his second run for Mayor of New York in 1897; Purdy of New York had
campaigned for George. It is not likely a coincidence that all four of these George disciples or
allies presided over cities that grew much faster than most others.

An evidence of early networking was action at the national level. In 1892 there were six
single-tax Congressmen: Tom Johnson and Michael Harter of Ohio; Jerry Simpson, Kansas;
John de Witt Warner and Charles Tracy, New York; and James Maguire, California. They
managed to help keep land rents in the base of the 1894 Income Tax Act. In 1896, John Peter
Altgeld was the brains behind the fused Democratic-Populist platforms. Charles Evans Hughes
nearly became U.S. President in 1916. Single-tax Congressmen Henry George, Jr., and Warren
Worth Bailey dominated the drafting of the income-tax act of 1916 which exempted most labor
income and taxed a lot of land rent. Woodrow Wilson appointed several Georgists to his cabinet,
elevating Newton Baker to national stature as his Secretary of War; and Baker later came within
a hair of being the Democratic Presidential nominee in 1932. Al Smith, of course, was the
nominee in 1928, even as his New York City housing law was still working its magic there.

Networking extended to the fellow-traveling conservation and national parks movements.
Chicago, New York and San Francisco had led in providing their people with generous lands for
public parks, canvases for the palettes of outstanding park designers like Daniel Burnham and
Frederic Law Olmstead. It was a logical extension when Chicago and San Francisco supplied
leaders for the National Park Service, founded in 1916 when Interior Secretary Franklin Lane of
San Francisco, supported by Congressman William Kent of San Francisco, made Stephen T.
Mather of Chicago first head of the Service. Earlier President Roosevelt of New York had set
aside land for Yellowstone National Park. Later, Chicago progressive political junkie Harold L.
Ickes served FDR and HST as Secretary of the Interior, 1933-46—the longest tenure of a cabinet
officer in U.S. history. Ickes' long career was faithful to the model of John Peter Altgeld, whom
he had revered as a youth. Ickes in power battled long and fiercely to protect the public domain
from predators, to strengthen the national parks, to open public access to seashores, to save the
"tidelands" from control of states dominated by oil firms, to enforce the public trust doctrine as
Chicago had in 1892—all causes with a strong Georgist, or, if you prefer, Altgeldist component.

Many stories remain untold or only briefly referenced here, of Houston, Vancouver, Victoria,
New Westminster, Edmonton, Saskatoon, Portland, Seattle, Los Angeles, San Diego, and
California farm towns like Modesto, Turlock, Fallbrook, Merced, Manteca, Fresno, Lindsay, et
al., and irrigated farming around them under California's Irrigation District Acts (Henley;
Gaffney, 1969; Rhodes). One “farm town”, San Jose, stimulated by its tailor-made modified
irrigation district*, morphed into a major city and the capital of Silicon Valley. Populist farmers
in the upper Midwest, with their “Non-Partisan League” and strong cooperatives, leaned toward
single-tax. Farmers and farm towns in Canada’s Prairie Provinces with their CCF Party leaned
the same. George-like single-tax fervor bent, if it did not dominate, most of the Pacific Coast and
western Canada, rural and urban, during their fastest growth periods.

We begin with New York City, move on through the cities cited above, and end with two
anomalies. One is that Pittsburgh, long the poster-child of Georgist publicity, has lagged in
population. The other is that “radical” and labor-oriented cities seem to grow faster than cities
like Cincinnati with “pro-business” administrations.

I. New York City Reborn, 1920-31

A. Al Smith's 1920 Tax Reform Act and its Apparent Effects

In September, 1920, Governor Al Smith of New York declared an emergency in New York
City, a “housing crisis,” and called a special session of the legislature to deal with it (Polak,
1924). The emergency was one of wholesale eviction notices, zero housing vacancies, and
soaring rents. Gov. Smith’s message of 9/20/20 called for exempting new dwelling construction

*Tts name is quite a mouthful: The Santa Clara Valley Water Conservation District. It is modeled on a Wright
Act Irrigation District, under State Law, taxing land values and exempting buildings. Attorneys Herbert Jones and
Albert Henley modified it to fit political conditions, as they saw them, around and including San Jose. They
exempted improvements outside the city, and taxed them inside, to mollify the farmers. There followed what seemed
at first to be an awful example of urban sprawl, as the subdivision of farm landholdings enabled developers to pick
up farm lands here and there; but the result today is Silicon Valley.
from taxation—a proposal that several legislators had previously advanced. The Legislature
adopted this proposal, with a local option feature, tailoring the law mainly for New York City.’.
In 1921 the New York City Council took the option. There ensued an extraordinary boom in both
building and population, beginning immediately and with an “echo effect” to 1940, even during
the Great Depression when most other cities’ populations froze.

The “Al Smith Act” (as I will call it) exempted new housing construction (but not land
values) from the property tax from 1921 until the end of 1931. The property tax rate was around
2.7% of true value, at times up to 3%, making this a consequential matter, especially for
dwellings built in the early 1920s which would qualify for up to ten years of exemption. Owing
to the time value of money, full exemption for the first ten years of life is worth as much as or
more than half-exemption over full life, especially considering that depreciation and
obsolescence of buildings lower their taxable values in later life. Mortgage rates were around
6%, so the tax that was not levied would have added nearly 50% to the financial carrying costs of
buildings. With a generous supply of new housing, NYC’s population then grew much faster,
even percentage-wise, than that of comparison cities, from 1920 to 1940, and for a while
thereafter. See Tables I and II for city population data, 1890-1998. The data, first gathered for the
purpose above, then point us to some other cities with decades of fast growth, which we
examine.

B. NYC’s Success, and its Meaning

NYC’s growth had been slowing down just before the Act of 1920. After 1931 when the law
expired, NYC grew slower than before, but this was the Great Depression, when most
comparison cities stopped dead, and began to waste away. NYC not only held its #1 population
ranking among U.S. cities, it pulled farther ahead in numbers, 1920-40, even in percentage terms.
This finding tends:

1. to refute the “convergence” thesis, which would have all cities becoming more alike,
regardless of public policies;

2. to deny the inevitability of “regression towards the mean,” which would have the top city
of one generation be replaced at the top in the next;

3. to support a thesis that the 1920 law had the intended effect of reanimating NYC at a time
when it would otherwise have stagnated and begun to rot like other older eastern cities;

4. to suggest that cities and states, through their public policies, control their own destinies.
II. NYC Under the Al Smith Act

A. Sources on the Smith Act
The original stimulus for this study was a pamphlet by Charles Johnson Post, 1984, How New

°Six other cities accepted the option, but I find no record of their experiences with it. I suspect their efforts were
blocked by problems of overlapping taxing jurisdictions—problems lacking in NYC, where counties and school
districts are coterminous with the city.
York Solved its Housing Crisis. C.J. Post (son of Louis F. Post*) gives data on per capita
spending on new buildings in NYC and four comparison cities for the years 1910 to 1929. These
data show that NYC abruptly recovered from stagnation in 1920, and far outstripped the
comparison cities that Post chose: Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, and, to a lesser extent,
Chicago. Post credits New York’s extraordinary housing tax holiday, 1920-31, for this recovery.
Post's findings want substantiation because they are momentous, while his proofs are casual and
his mood preachy.

Post gives no sources for his data, which stop after 1929. Edward Polak (1924), Register of
Deeds for Bronx County, published a brief chapter on the years from 1921 through 1923, giving
data consistent with Post's, showing a startling seven-fold rise in NYC construction outlays
compared with the previous three years, 1918-20. Geiger, normally a careful scholar, concludes
without reservations, "There is little doubt that the tremendous building boom in the years
immediately following 1920 was a direct result of that exemption" (1933, p.438). Geiger,
though, provides no data or other support, and does not even cite Polak. Perhaps he regarded the
New York boom as common knowledge. If it was so in 1933, it is not now, and wants
documentation.

Fortunately, we have Pleydell and Wood (1960), a detailed, extensive chronicle of the
legislative history, news reports, and some studies of the results. The authors make no attempt to
organize the materials, except chronologically, or to interpret or explain them. Pleydell does not
make good reading, therefore, and one doubts if anyone but this researcher ever read it through;
but it is valuable for confirming and supporting, however tediously, the interpretations given by
Geiger, Post, Polak, Purdy, and others cited. We learn, for example, that in 1923 the Borough of
Brooklyn, alone, led every city in the country in construction (p.3-51). We learn that the number
of new family dwelling units, other than tenements, produced in NYC rose from 11,000 in 1920
to 56,000 in 1923; while the number of new family dwelling units in tenements rose from 3,000
to 53,000 (Appendix pp. 20-23. citing 1924 Report of Stein Commission). The most complete
source cited is Leg. Doc 40, Report of the Commission on Housing & Regional Planning, chaired
by Clarence Stein, a prominent New York architect and citizen. This last Stein Report includes
statistics on new construction in NYC from Oct. 1920 thru Sept. 1925. A series of earlier reports
by this commission, under Stein, documented the building boom, and attributed it to the Al
Smith Act.

The F.W. Dodge Co. reported monthly on floor space contracted for. This rose from .5m s.f.
in December, 1920, to 13m s.f. in December, 1923, a 26-fold increase (Pleydell and Wood,
Appendix p.22).

Another source is the archive of papers of Lawson Purdy, at the Robert Schalkenbach
Foundation, New York. Purdy directs us to the Report of Commissioners of Taxes and
Assessments of the City of NY for 1931, p.12, for data confirming Post’s statements.

So I will accept Post’s data, in spite of his shortcomings as a writer. His data seem confirmed
by city records, from which he apparently took them. The population changes documented herein
track Post’s construction data quite well, adding to his credibility.

SL.F. Post, a prominent Chicago Georgist, author of several Georgist books, edited The Public for many years,
before becoming Asst. Secy. of Labor under President Wilson, where he played an heroic role in blunting the
hysteria of the Palmer Raids.
Published literature on this episode, either popular or scholarly, is sparse. Here was a major
event, in the nation’s biggest city, an event filled with policy implications. The event involved
major public and political figures, filled with human interest. The world has not lacked for
striving young professionals seeking new research topics. They have selected, all too often,
minutiae, or passing fads, or pedantic parlor games, as though they had to fabricate to find
worthy subjects. It is a sorrow and a puzzle, but it leaves us with a neglected job to do, beginning
with this paper.

Post sketches the enabling law (NY State Laws of 1920, ch. 949, section 4-B, and later
amendments). New construction, to qualify, had to be ready for occupancy by April 1, 1926; and
the tax-exemption, whatever the beginning date, lasted through December 31, 1931. The
exemption had a cap of $1,000 per room, and $5,000 per house or apartment building, later
raised to $15,000 (Geiger, 1933, p.438, n.137). These caps might seem to make this law
resemble the "homestead exemptions" common in southeastern states, but the NYC exemptions
applied only to buildings, not to land, and were much tighter, targeted to aid middle class
residents mainly. Pleydell and Wood goes into great detail, more than is needed here, but
definitively confirming the major points of Post, Polak and Geiger.’

B. Political History: The Georgist Factor

None of the sources adequately emphasize that the law applied not just to the municipality of
New York City, but also the five counties that comprise its five “boroughs,” and also to its
school taxes. The Act authorizes ALL units of local government to exempt buildings (Pleydell,
Appendices, p.32, has the relevant text of the Act). The entire property tax was affected, in
contrast to say, Pittsburgh, where its “graded tax plan” affects only that one-third or less of the
property tax that is levied by the municipality. It is not surprising, then, that the NYC law had
more visible effects.

This more thoroughgoing “root and branch” attitude in New York reveals the existence of a
strong, long-standing political movement. The New York Act sprang from a political history that
links it to the movement Henry George left behind in New York, as well as to other Georgist
episodes, to be related later, in Cleveland, Detroit, Toledo, Jersey City, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh,
and Chicago. Gov. Al Smith took the visible lead, but he, like most political leaders, had to be
pushed.

Who was it that pushed? A major force was the group of single-tax clubs of NYC, the
enduring legacy of Henry George’s runs for Mayor of NYC in 1886 and 1897. After George’s
death, his influence survived him in his adopted home. “New York has been, more than any
other city, a center of sustained single-tax activity and influence” (Young, p.215). Several NYC
organizations and their hardball politics are documented in Miller (pp.19, 440-43), Young
(pp.215-29, 244), Marsh (1953, pp. 17-36), Barker (pp. 521, 622-23), L.F. Post (1930, pp. 50-
53), and Geiger (pp. 436-37). They left literary tracks in long reports and proceedings of city

7In 1927 there came a new 20-year exemption for dwellings built by “limited dividend companies under the State
housing law,” but this seems to have been closely hedged in, tailored for a big and powerful insurance company,
Metropolitan Life, and of little overall weight. Metropolitan Life was constantly at work seeking favorable
legislation, e.g. income-tax exemption for mortgage interest. It is still a major player in NYC real estate, e.g. with
Stuyvesant Town and the Cooper package, which it recently sold. It was not, however, a major player under the
Smith Act, tailored to small owners.
10

commissions (Marling, 1916; Haig, 1915). Polak (1915) was in the fray in the academic journals.
“In NYC ... later Georgism (i.e. after 1897) ... was aggressive, and it had power” (Barker,
pp.622-23).

Those involved in or supporting or patronizing the movement included Gov. Charles Evans
Hughes, Wall Street guru John Moody, Senator Tim Sullivan, lender Charles O’Connor
Hennessy, and visible reformers like Jacob Riis, Lillian Wald, Frederic Leubuscher, Florence
Kelley, Judge Samuel Seabury, and Lawson Purdy—dquite a roster, across the spectrum from
social reformers to lawyers and conservative lenders, and including one near-miss U.S. President
(Hughes), and one visible aspirant (Seabury*). Ben Marsh was ever the dedicated sparkplug and
organizer; Joseph Dana Miller the recorder and journalist. In 1912, Marsh got even Theodore
Roosevelt to speak for a George-oriented tax change and TR “made a rattling good speech ...
which got splendid publicity” (Marsh, 1953, p.30). Lillian Wald raised contributions from Jacob
Schiff, and the Warburg brothers of Kuhn Loeb.

Before Smith was governor, Albany had blocked several single-tax bills, in the years 1909-16.
Earlier, as majority leader of the Assembly and a Tammany wheelhorse, Smith himself had
blocked a 1911 Georgist effort (the Sullivan-Shortt Bill) along similar lines. Busy Ben Marsh,
who combined activism with chronicling, claimed Smith admitted that the Roman Catholic
hierarchy and the New York Real Estate Board swayed him against Georgists (Marsh, 1953, pp.
21-22). Perhaps so, but times and people change. Smith turned around after 1911, his change
triggered by the awful incineration of 150 people trapped in the Triangle Shirtwaist Company
workroom—a traumatic, watershed event of the times. He gave yeoman service on the resulting
state Factory Investigation Commission, 1911-15, working with the likes of Frances Perkins and
Samuel Gompers.

Perkins and other social workers saw to it that Smith and his co-chair, Robert Wagner, got
well exposed to sweatshop working conditions and housing (Colburn, p.29). Smith and the social
workers warmed to each other (Colburn, p.31). Smith’s base, Tammany Hall, also turned, under
the leadership of Charles Murphy, seeking to keep up with Progressive Republican Charles
Evans Hughes who won the governorship, 1905-09, by his efforts to improve working
conditions. The old “bosses” and the social reformers had something in common: they protected
and enhanced the poor, much more so than did elitist “managerial reformers” like Mayors Seth
Low and John Purroy Mitchel (Brownell, p.10; Holli, p.169). When first elected governor in
1918, Smith was a changed man with a new power base. We may surmise, also, that his success
in reviving NYC helped boost him to the Democratic nomination for U.S. President in 1928, and
that was on his mind. Among other things, Smith, a Catholic, had to establish his independence
from the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy, with its anti-Georgist history and mindset as
revealed in its shabby treatment of Fr. Edward McGlynn (Gaffney,2000, and sources there cited).

C. Assessment Reform, Silent Senior Partner of Tax Reform

In addition to the Al Smith Act, Georgist thought and activism had made NYC assessors up-
value land in the tax base, and down-value improvements, by recognizing the silent appreciation

5 Seabury’s Georgist tendencies are cited in Fitch, 1985, p.192; his run at the 1932 Democratic Presidential
nomination is in Neil. Seabury’s pro-Georgist views are also expressed in his speech at the opening of the 1939
World’s Fair.
11

of land, and depreciation and obsolescence of buildings over time. The leader in this work was
Lawson Purdy (Young, p.216; Geiger, p.436; Barker, pp. 582, 590, 623; Marsh, 1911, p.107).
Purdy, a lawyer, was an early single-tax campaigner, a young associate of Henry George’s later
years, who soon became President of the Board of Taxes and Assessments of the City of New
York. As such he published The Assessment of Real Estate. Robert Murray Haig, noted Professor
of Economics at Columbia University, in the Foreword, calls Purdy “the acknowledged authority
in this field.” The single-tax warrior had become accepted in polite New York society, while
remaining a leader of the Manhattan Single Tax Club (Barker, p.521). Purdy was also a power in
the early history of the National Tax Association.

In form, Purdy’s short treatise is procedural and administrative, gray and even a bit dull, but it
wastes no words. It is mostly about how to value land, and draw up and publicize maps of land
values used in assessing real estate for taxation. It draws on and enriches W.A. Somers’ earlier
work in Cleveland, which Mayor Tom L. Johnson sponsored and publicized. Indeed, Purdy had
gone to Cleveland in 1909 to consult with Somers, to teach and to learn (Barker, p.625). Purdy’s
little monograph, along with longer works by Somers, Zangerle, Pollock and Scholz, and the
Australian John Murray, constitute the “5-foot shelf of books” on how to value land for taxation
where the intent is to make the typical American tax on “real estate” (land plus buildings) most
resemble a tax on land alone. These books were assessment bibles in the 1920s, before the “dark
days” of property-tax debasement set in’.

Mayor Tom L. Johnson of Cleveland, Somers’ boss, had been Henry George’s “field
commander” (Barker, passim). Johnson also became a major power in Ohio state politics
(Russell, passim). Purdy when young was a leading campaigner for Henry George in 1897,
George’s last campaign for Mayor of New York. Purdy continued to be an officer in the
Manhattan Single Tax Club, and a Director of the Robert Schalkenbach Foundation: there is no
doubt where Purdy was coming from.

Purdy’s treatise tells NYC assessors to value the land first, as though it were bare, and then
assign any residual value to the building. “The full value of any building is [only] the sum which
the presence of the building adds to the value of the land.” Even a new building, if in the wrong
place, has no more than “junk value” (Purdy, p.13). Today we call that the “building-residual
method” of separating land from building value. This vital concept is straight from the single-tax
movement, and central to its implementation. (It is also clearly laid out in Alfred Marshall’s
Principles of Economics.) Thanks to the concept’s application, the value of land in the NYC tax
base considerably exceeded the value of buildings during the Purdy era, coinciding with the
period that the Al Smith Act covered.

D. The Plenty in Land as a Tax Base

NYC, in granting this tax holiday for new housing, was not “racing to the bottom” in terms of
public spending. NYC financed one of the world’s best mass transit systems, and the nation’s
best city college system (the “poor man’s Harvard”) with an impressive roster of graduates in the
professions. Its parks and libraries were outstanding; its schools and social services above the
national norm. NYC was not lowering taxes, but shifting them off buildings and onto land

° These dark days resulted in part from the incentives created by the Federal income tax, to overstate the building or
“depreciable” component of real estate value relative to the land or non-depreciable component.
12

values. Exempting buildings had the effect of raising land prices, thus preserving and even
augmenting the overall tax base. The taxable assessed value of land in NYC rose steeply under
this stimulus. In the 3-14-24 report of the (Clarence) Stein Committee we read,

“There has been a tremendous increase in land assessments since 1920 in all the
boroughs. ... The resumption of building has greatly increased the taxable value of the
land, which is not included in the exemption. ... Tax exemption is creating aggregate
taxable values to an extent heretofore unknown in the history of any municipality.”
(Pleydell, Appendix p.23, emphasis mine).

The above supports the “Physiocratic'® Theory of Tax Incidence” (all taxes come out of rents,
or “ATCOR”). There are several more such statements scattered through Pleydell and Wood.
Purdy cites the New York City Tax Department Report, 1931, pp.18-19, showing the assessed
value of land by boroughs, 1904-31 (Purdy Papers, 9-24-34). Fragmentary evidence in Pleydell
and Wood indicates that city revenues rose, while the tax rate fell (Section 3, pp. 31, 38-48, 51,
58, 74).

Some might see a kind of parallel here with the “Laffer-Curve Effect” of recent federal
finance, where lowering the tax rate is alleged to raise the tax base. Some champions of the Al
Smith Act did advance such a point, arguing that the new tax exempt houses would not even be
there if they were not exempted, and they would come on the tax rolls in 1932. The parallel is
not very good, and we leave the issue moot here, because it distracts from the larger point that
the land tax base rose immediately and hugely. Banker Charles Hennessy wrote that the Al Smith
Act resulted in “wild speculation in building sites, immediately reflected in rising prices” (Purdy
Papers, 7-7-34). Reinforcing statements are scattered throughout Pleydell and Wood. Federal tax
cuts under Reagan also caused steep rises in land values, but Reagan’s policies differed in that
they favored land income as much as or more than income from using and improving land, and
resulted in deficits. NYC tax cuts under the Al Smith Act applied only to new buildings, and
were more than compensated, it seems, by a rise of the land tax base, which NYC immediately
tapped for public revenue. Thanks to this rise of the tax base, it was even able to lower its
general property tax rate.

E. Features of the Law as Applied, Summarized

There was more to the Smith Act in practice than meets the eye. Herewith is a summary of its
relevant features.

1. Newly built dwelling units were totally exempt from the property tax through 1931.
2. Land was not exempt, either before or after building.

3. Land assessments were kept up to date, using the building-residual method of separating
land and building values.

4. All levels of local taxation—city, county, and school district—were under the law.

© The Physiocrats were 18" Century French economists including Quesnay, Mirabeau, Turgot, Condorcet, DuPont,
and others, who developed this theme in the course of advocating something like the “single-tax” — indeed, they
called it 1’ imp6t unique. Their students included Adam Smith, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, James Monroe,
Benjamin Franklin, the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II of Austria, and other influentials in foreign lands.
13

5. The tax rate was moderately high, around 3%. Public services were maintained at fairly
high levels. These included a city college system, and mass transit with low fares.

6. There were dollar caps on exemptions: per room, per family, and per building.
Rental units as well as owner units were exempted.

8. The law had to be renewed annually, both at the State and local levels. It began in 1921,
and was extended in 1922, 1923, and 1924. Each extension covered buildings completed
in the next two years, so buildings completed as late as April 1, 1926, could qualify for
exemption.

9. The law was challenged in court and at one point overturned, but later upheld on appeal.
This litigation for a while added to the uncertainty of it.

10. There was a strong base of local understanding and support.

F. NYC Outstripping Comparison Cities, 1920-40

For comparison with NYC, I have limited the data to cities north and east of Kansas City,
mainly with fixed boundaries. I have grouped them as follows, presenting aggregate data for
each group (as well as for the individual cities).

1. Four other major cities in NY State: Albany, Syracuse'', Rochester and Buffalo. Statewide
policies would affect all these the same. [The Al Smith enabling act, although “local
option” in form, was tailored for NYC (Post, 1984, p.1).] Rochester and Buffalo and, to a
degree, Albany, also pick up influences from the Great Lakes economy; these influences
also reach NYC. From 1920-40, these cities grew by 13.8%, while NYC grew by 32.7%,
or 2.4 times as much.

2. Five other major cities along the mid-Atlantic coast: Boston, Providence, New Haven,
Philadelphia, and Baltimore. From 1920-40, these cities grew by 7.3%, while NYC grew
by 4.8 times as much.

3. Nearby New Jersey neighbors of NYC: Jersey City, Newark, and Paterson. (Jersey City
and Newark might also be lumped with the cities in “B”, but are such close locational
substitutes for NYC that separate treatment seems warranted.) From 1920-40, these New
Jersey neighbors of NYC grew by 2.8%, while NYC grew by 11.7 times as much.

Do these facts speak for themselves? Not entirely: a sequence is not always a consequence,
and in the multivariate world of economics, “proofs” are always subject to doubt and open to
challenge. Certainly, though, the NYC tax holiday was a relevant cause, with an effect expected
a priori. The expected events started happening immediately, somewhat as the Dow-Jones jumps
when Fed Chairman Greenspan announces an interest-rate cut, but with more lasting results.
Anyone questioning cause and effect here should shoulder some burden of proof.

I have also disaggregated NYC into its boroughs. Manhattan actually lost some resident
population, 1920-40, while the explosive population growth was in the outer boroughs of Bronx,

"Syracuse added a large area, 1920-30, inflating its growth rate and therefore, of course, that of the four cities
taken together (Comick, p.57).
14

Brooklyn, and especially Queens”. One reason for the difference is the exemption cap of $5,000,
which would carry less relative weight in the pricier housing of Manhattan. Still, this raises the
qualifying possibility that NYC had simply merged with its inner suburbs, unlike some
comparison cities, which provided it with land to expand; lacking in, say, Boston or Pittsburgh. It
is true that most of the building under the Act went up in the outer boroughs. There are two
reasons to doubt the weight of this qualification, however. One is that the population density of
NYC was double that of any comparison city, vast although NYC’s area is. The other is that the
merger occurred in 1898, while the growth revival we are studying didn’t begin until 22 years
later, after NYC appeared to be choking from lack of housing.

The futility of annexation alone was shown by Milwaukee after 1960. Milwaukee grew faster
than most other cities up until then, when it annexed all of northwest Milwaukee County and
doubled its area. Yet, the City started losing population at that very time, by hollowing out. It
takes more than annexing land to grow a city. Most cities already have lots of derelict land; what
they need are incentives.

NYC tax policy worked in tandem with related growth policies. NYC in the 1920s
coordinated its tax policy with developing its mass transit system, and holding fares down, much
as Cleveland had done in the Johnson-Baker era, 1900-20. If Cleveland was known for Johnson’s
low 3-cent fare, New York was famous for its low 5-cent fare under many administrations, clear
up to 1947. New tunnels under the East and Harlem Rivers linked up with pre-existing elevated
and subway lines in the outer boroughs, giving mass transit a sudden boost (Dick Netzer, letter,
30 Dec 2000). By 1930, 91% of the population lived on 40% of the city’s land area—the land
within half-mile strips on either side of elevateds and subways (Cornick, p.86). NYC held down
fares by covering capital costs, and perhaps some operating deficits, from property taxes. With
many new buildings being tax-exempt, and Purdy in charge of assessments, that meant raising
taxes on land values.’ (For details on New York’s transit development, see Hammack, Fitch,
Chernow, Jackson, and Hood.)

All USS. cities in the 1920s poured a disproportionately high fraction of capital into public
works, owing to the new Federal personal income tax, levied at high rates. The 1920s was the
first peacetime decade of experience with high rates of personal income taxation. Lenders shied
away from mortgages on private real estate, whose interest was fully taxable, in favor of tax-
exempt municipals.

It is true, of course, that the “imputed income” of owner-occupied residences is also tax-
exempt. There are reasons, however, why this exemption is weaker than that on municipal bonds.

1. The supply of loanable funds is highly elastic, so the income tax on interest income is
mostly shifted forward to borrowers in higher interest rates. It is thus only the equity
fraction of a home’s value that yield’s tax-exempt imputed income. New building is
heavily financed, especially when the buyers are middle or lower-middle class wage-
earners—they have little equity.

1 have omitted Richmond (Staten Island), as too small in population to matter.

The academic world recognized this after a lag, with Hotelling’s famous article in 1938. Even this article did
not lack for theoretical detractors like Ragnar Frisch and I.M.D. Little.
15

2. Itis also true that interest paid by homeowners is deductible, seeming to offset the tax-
induced interest premium they pay. However, that applies only to owners who itemize;
most middle-class wage-earners do not, even today, and certainly did not in the 1920s
when most did not even have to file.

3. The homes affordable by the working poor are mostly on cheap land. New homes on
cheap land have a high ratio of building value to land value. Yet it is mainly the land or
location element in homes that yields imputed true income. The “service flow” from
buildings per se is largely offset by depreciation and maintenance and upkeep expenses,
and is not net income at all. The unearned increment of the land value under and around a
house, which is taxed much lighter than “ordinary” income from labor, comes entirely
from the land element. I would be delighted to learn of a single writer on income tax
matters who has gotten those points—I know of none.

The upshot of those three points is that income taxation, with exemption of municipal bonds,
induces unbalanced urban expansion: too many streets and lots, not enough building to match.

In many cities, like Chicago and Detroit, this imbalance of public works and private building
led to excess subdivision and catastrophe, well documented in works by Homer Hoyt, Ernest
Fisher, Lewis Maverick and others. The “orphan subdivision” exemplified the problem: a few
scattered houses in a wilderness of vacant lots, streets full of weeds, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
fire hydrants and street lights. New York was not exempt from this curse of the times, but its
experience was much less extreme: its private sector was keeping better pace and balance with
its public sector.

New York's greater population surge is the more impressive because of its greater dependence
on immigration. Immigrants flow to all cities, including those deep in the heartland, but the
fraction in New York has always been higher, owing to its gateway position. The Immigration
Act of 1924, cutting immigration sharply, therefore impacted New York more than comparison
cities - yet New York grew faster than the others. In the depression of the 1930s net immigration
to the U.S.A. stopped completely, yet NYC continued to grow while most other cities stopped or
shrank. NYC suburbs were growing too, as in other metropolitan areas; but this metro area did
not hollow out like the others: the center held.

G. Summary: Effectiveness of the Smith Act

The Smith Act almost certainly helped cause a number of ensuing events, 1921-40.

1. Building of new dwelling units rose by high factors that can fairly be called extreme and
unprecedented.

2. NYC maintained and extended its national lead in population, even in percentage terms.
There was no tendency to “converge,” or “regress towards the mean.”

3. NYC continued to grow, even during the Great Depression, when almost every other city
of the Northeast Quadrant stopped.

4. NYC supplied housing for the mass middle and lower-middle class markets.

NYC land values rose sharply, even though taxation was more focused on land than
before.
16

6. The location of new housing was compact, concentric, and compatible with continued use
of mass transit.

7. The flow of capital into public works was matched and balanced by capital going into
improving private lands.

8. NYC overcame the relative handicap to growth imposed by the Immigration Act of 1924,
and the national stoppage of net immigration in the depression years.

9. NYC grew, 1920-40, in spite of its beginning the period with a higher density than other
cities, and not expanding its boundaries.

H. Aftermath

After 1932 the forces of tax limitation rallied, financed by the likes of the Rockefeller
Brothers, the Seth Low family, A.A. Berle, and of course several others. According to Robert
Fitch they chose Fiorello La Guardia as their front man, trusting him to put on a populist charade
while capping their taxes and promoting a 6" Avenue subway line to serve Rockefeller Center
(Fitch, 1985, p.192). And so New York City’s remarkable growth spurt tapered off, leaving it
larger, but otherwise much like many other older cities.

III. Growth Spurts in some Other Cities

Data in Table I, p. 310, gathered originally for comparison with NYC, also point us to some
other cities that grew rapidly during parts of 1890-1940. Some grew faster, percentage-wise, than
NYC. What, then, is special about NYC’s spurt? In several of the other cities, rapid growth was
associated with Georgist-oriented policies and attitudes similar to those of NYC under its Al
Smith Act, and its Lawson Purdy assessment practices. This supports C.J. Post’s and Geiger’s
and Polak’s assertions of cause and effect.

A. Cleveland, 1900-20

Cleveland grew by 109%, 1900-20. For most of this time it was under the administrations of
single-taxers Tom L. Johnson, 1901-09, and Newton D. Baker, 1911-16. Charles Barker,
biographer of Henry George, describes Johnson as George’s “field commander”. In 1906, Mayor
Johnson inaugurated a low 3-cent trolley fare which entailed possible deficits he intended to
meet by taxing real estate. In 1909, Johnson formally put in place reformed machinery for land
assessment. W.A. Somers, who had supplied his “standard unit” system of mapping land values
to Johnson in 1901, was made Chief Clerk. Somers supervised the first quadrennial assessment
(Post, 1915, p.91). Johnson and Somers raised assessments from $180m to $500m, with a new
emphasis on land values. For the first time, there was a fair assessment in Cleveland (Russell,
p.291; Bremner, Chap. 14, pp.153-64).

Johnson and Somers analyzed property assessments, and found that assessors had been
undervaluing holdings in rich neighborhoods, and overvaluing those in poor. Johnson, a master
showman, put up large maps illustrating this, inviting discussion and suggestions from the
public. To aid understanding, he pushed “the Somers unit system”—a system later used by Purdy
in NYC. A Standard Unit was one front foot, 100’ deep, with formulas to adjust for corner
influence, depth influence, etc.

To win support for up-valuing land and down-valuing buildings, Johnson set up a city-
17

sponsored Tax School in 1901. The biggest landowner in Cleveland sued to stop it, and won, but
by the time the Tax School closed it had operated for 20 months, and prepared the public mind
for a large rise of land assessments (Johnson, pp.127, 129; Bremner, pp. 129, 136, 157-58).
Johnson’s parting view upon leaving office in 1909 was of his candidates taking control of the
City Board of Equalization, which had the last word on assessed valuations (Bremner, pp.162-
64). To this day a bronze statue of Johnson stands in downtown Cleveland, holding a book out
for all to see, and on it engraven Progress and Poverty.

Johnson's City Solicitor and ally, Newton D. Baker, was another remarkable leader, who later
nearly edged out FDR for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1932 (Cramer; Neal;
Moley). Baker won the mayoralty in 1911, after an interregnum of just two years. Baker
implemented Johnsonian policies until President Wilson appointed him Secretary of War in
1916. This high-level appointment recognized the political power of the single-tax movement in
that era, a power that later historians and economists have wrongly trivialized. Baker left behind
an improved infrastructure, and the city debt that financed it, so the City needed heavy land-
value taxes for some time to come. Peter Witt, often described as “a fiery single-taxer”, ran to
succeed Baker and lost only narrowly, indicating that Johnsonian policies retained a large
constituency. After 1916, though, Cleveland slowly fell into old-line Tory hands (Cramer, p.7). It
also began its long slide into its present torpor and mediocrity. From 1900 to 1920, Cleveland's
population had more than doubled. If Cleveland had continued growing at the Johnson-Baker
rate, its population today would be 15 millions or so, double that of NYC, and 30 times the half
million it actually has now. Its masses of voters would dominate Ohio politics, which helps
explain the efforts of the Taft and Hanna machines in the 1912 Ohio constitutional convention, to
be described below, to block its pro-growth policies.

B. Detroit, 1890-1930

Detroit's soaring growth, 1890-1930, obviously involved the auto industry, but why did that
industry focus on Detroit? There was no St. Lawrence Seaway—that opened in 1959, when it
failed to arrest the decline of most Great Lakes cities, whose leaders were failing to stop their
internal decay. Growth began under Mayor, then Governor Hazen S. Pingree (Lorenz, pp.17-18;
Johnson, p.91). Pingree had called Tom Johnson to Detroit in 1899 to help beef up its street car
system and lower fares, under public ownership (Lorenz, pp.17-18; Johnson, pp.91-97; Bremner,
p.42; Bemis). It is one of the great ironies: The Motor City, whose auto firms did so much to
destroy mass transit, originally attracted them by providing cheap mass transit for their workers.
Pingree was growth-oriented, but not annexationist, and was in tune with Johnson.

Growth after Pingree, however, entailed vast annexations, nearly quadrupling the City area by
1930. During this period Detroit subsidized sprawl massively, resulting in one of the worst cases
of excess subdivision in the U.S.A. at that time (Fisher and Smith, 1932; Fisher, 1933), although
there was keen competition for that superlative. Historians have neglected Pingree as compared
with Johnson and Baker of Cleveland, and Jones and Whitlock of Toledo, but Joseph Dana
Miller rates Pingree with Johnson and Whitlock as a “true single-taxer” (Miller, pp. 411-12).

Table I shows a sensational collapse of Detroit after 1950 or so. A weak market for autos?
Hardly: Detroit’s fall coincided with the Interstate Highway System and the greatest auto sales
boom in history. The St. Lawrence Seaway opened in 1959, opening more export markets.
18

Foreign competition came later. Detroit’s leaders, auto-oriented, forgot the Pingree policies that
had launched Detroit earlier'*. During Detroit's fall, the brand new suburb of Southfield elected a
latter-day single-tax Mayor, James Clarkson, who appointed a single-tax assessor, Ted
Gwartney. During the Clarkson-Gwartney era Southfield boomed vigorously, until opposing
forces got Clarkson kicked upstairs as a lifetime judge. Thereupon, Southfield immediately
stagnated."

C. Toledo, 1890-1920

Toledo tripled its population, 1890-1920. Much of this occurred under single-tax Mayors
Samuel M. “Golden Rule” Jones, 1897-1904, and his disciple, Brand Whitlock, 1905-1913, a
graduate of Gov. Altgeld’s populist administration in Illinois. Many cities grew fast in this
period, but Toledo grew by 200%, outpacing most other cities. Books by Jones and Whitlock tell
much of the story.

Toledo peaked out after 1920. The shackles of the 1912 Constitution blocked Toledo just as
they did Cleveland. In addition, according to Milwaukee Mayor Daniel Hoan, the railroads with
their key landholdings choked Toledo by tying up its waterfront (Kerstein, pp.42-43). Hoan had
taken drastic action to take control of Milwaukee’s waterfront, with its city-owned port and
parks. Chicago had earlier done the same. It was Hoan who led the fight for the St. Lawrence
Seaway Project, fighting railroad corporations all the way.

D. Milwaukee, 1916-40

Milwaukee grew fast for 30 years under its "socialist" Mayors Emil Seidel (1910-12) and
Daniel Hoan (1916-40). Hoan’s tenure was the longest of any Mayor of a large American city;
he was nationally recognized as the best mayor in the country, and Milwaukee under Hoan was
the best-governed city (Kerstein, 1966). This was a period of slowing growth in most other cities
in Table I.

Hoan's brand of what others labeled "sewer socialism" consisted in applying the principles of
marginal-cost pricing to Milwaukee's infrastructure, meaning keeping transit and utility user-
rates low, and meeting deficits by raising property taxes. Hoan also expanded social services,
and pressed city assessors (in Milwaukee these serve at the mayor's pleasure) to up-value land
and down-value buildings (Hoan, 1936, pp.26-27). Hoan had his assessor distribute maps of city
land values, block by block, to enlist citizen aid and support for assessing land first, and
buildings "residually"—the quick and easy way, as well as the theoretically correct way, to raise
assessed values of land and lower those of buildings. This is the system spread by W.A. Somers,
and at that time known by his name. Like all progressive mayors of the era, and like Tax
Commissioner Purdy in NYC, Hoan studied and learned from the achievements of Tom Johnson
(Hoan, passim).

“ Henry Ford in 1942 wrote the following: "We ought to tax all idle land the way Henry George said -
tax it heavily so that its owners have to make it productive" (Wilhelm). Ford was erratic on social
policy, but his statement at least shows that a prominent leader in the area was aware of the policy.

'S Gwartney, after Southfield, led the British Columbia Assessment Authority for many years. He is now (2006)
Director of Assessments in Greenwich, CT. Under Gwartney, land value constitutes %4 of the assessed value of real
estate there.
19

Hoan also took control of Milwaukee’s waterfront from the rails for the City, creating the Port
of Milwaukee and a string of lakefront parks. Hoan was inspired by civic reform in Chicago,
where he had lived from 1905-08 under Mayor Edward Dunne (q.v.), and taken his law degree.
He modeled himself on Clarence Darrow.

Later Mayor Frank Zeidler (1950-60) was also a "socialist" of sorts, and well-intended, but
without Hoan’s keen mind. He believed annexation was the way to provide cheap housing for
workers so he annexed all of northwestern Milwaukee County, doubling the City's area. Then he
stepped down in 1961 for Henry Maier, whom he mistakenly thought would carry on the Hoan
tradition. Maier turned out to be retrograde, consumed by national ambitions and a do-nothing
strategy of blaming all the City’s problems on its suburbs and an imaginary conspiracy of
enemies. Under his leadership, Milwaukee started rapidly to hollow out and lose population.

The formula for growing and revitalizing cities seems to be the same, whether under a
"socialist" like Hoan, a colorful populist like Johnson, a reluctant dilettante like Whitlock, a
leading citizen like Purdy, or a lawyer like Clarkson: supply infrastructure, keep user-rates low,
raise land taxes, attend to the details of assessment, and go easy on buildings. It is simply the
economists’ theory of "marginal-cost pricing" as articulated by Hotelling (1938), and later
developed at length by William Vickrey in many books, lectures and articles (Arnott).

E. Chicago

Chicago grew by 54%, 1890-1900. This figure is inflated by annexation (Hoyt, p.153), but is
still a notable spurt, even in that decade of urban growth elsewhere. Chicago did not just spread,
it pioneered the skyscraper, and centralized its transit system as few other cities ever did. From
1900-30 it continued to grow at higher percentage rates than most other cities, and much higher
absolute rates, confirming its status as America’s second largest city.

Owing to a perpetual drainage problem, Chicago always faced higher property tax rates than
other cities (Ginger, p.24). This made the structure of the property tax especially important in
Chicago. High tax rates on buildings could have stopped its growth and renewal, but many signs
point to a single-tax trend in Chicago during this period.

Who was Chicago’s Tom Johnson? It was not one person, but a large and shifting group.
Chicago lawyer John Peter Altgeld, humanitarian and reformer, was Governor of Illinois, 1892-
96. His administration contained several single-taxers, including young Brand Whitlock, future
Mayor of Toledo, whom Altgeld inspired (Bremner, pp.57-58). Altgeld directly corresponded
and worked with Henry George, and, according to Whitlock, "understood" George's ideas like
few others (Barker, pp. 594, 607, 609).

In Chicago, unlike Detroit, rails paid property taxes. A tribute came from the rival State of
Michigan. "...if there could be an illustration stronger than any other of prosperity built upon
proper rules—that example is Chicago." (Dickinson, 1891). It was also a tribute to the efforts of
Mayor/Governor Hazen Pingree, who battled to get Michigan rails to pay taxes.

In 1892 Chicago won in Illinois Central R.R. v. Illinois (146 U.S. 387), a watershed decision,
invoking the “public trust doctrine” to revoke the corporation’s claim to lands that now comprise
Chicago’s lakefront park system. One battler for this cause was lawyer Alexander Stuart Bradley
(1881), later the (reluctant) father-in-law of Thorstein Veblen. This legal victory was nicely
synchronized with its Columbian Exposition, an impressive display of civic spirit, inspirational
civic architecture for public places, and a springboard for the career of Daniel Burnham, Chicago
20

planner.

It was under Governor Altgeld that the Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics, under George
Schilling, published its famous 8th Biennial Report, 1894, including comprehensive Lorenz-
Curve data on the concentration of landownership in what is now called The Loop of Chicago.
At Gov. Altgeld’s request, Schilling engaged Louis F. Post, leading Chicago Georgist
editor/publisher, to research the Report (Barnard, p.382). There is no comparable study, to my
knowledge, of another American city. The Report was so popular Illinois reissued it in 1896 — a
rare event for a governmental statistical report! Such support in Springfield had its effect locally
in Chicago. Schilling was a Chicago labor leader who helped elect Altgeld. The current cohort of
economists at the University of Chicago take it on faith that unions obstruct economic growth,
but one could not illustrate it from the City of Chicago, a major center of union activity during its
period of fastest growth (Leidenberger; Staley). These unions supported Altgeld, and Georgist
ideas.

Rather, Chicago was a national center of anti-monopoly and single-tax thought and activity in
this age of Mayor Edward F. Dunne, John Peter Altgeld, Ida Tarbell (History of Standard Oil),
Henry Demarest Lloyd (Wealth against Commonwealth), Clarence Darrow (Georgist City
Councilman, noted defense attorney and humanitarian), Edgar Lee Masters (Altgeld’s law
partner and author of Spoon River Anthology), Jane Addams (founder and head of Hull House, a
leading settlement house, later a Nobel Laureate), Julia Lathrop (founder of the Children’s
Bureau, U.S. Department of Labor, where she, a Taft appointee, soon collaborated with Louis F.
Post, Ass’t. Sec. of Labor under Wilson), Louis Sullivan and Frank Lloyd Wright and Walter
Burley Griffin (pioneer creative architects), Daniel Burnham (outstanding city and park planner),
Alexander Stuart Bradley, Kenesaw Mountain Landis (future baseball commissioner who
cleaned up the sport after the “Black Sox” scandal), Gutzon Borglum (sculptor of J.P. Altgeld in
Chicago and Mt. Rushmore in SD), Eugene Field (lawyer and poet), John Dewey (educational
philosopher), Margaret Haley (union leader and gadfly of assessments), Thorstein Veblen
(pioneer critic of the mores of greed), Edward Bemis (expert on utility and transit rates,
representing consumers), Louis F. and Alice Thacher Post and their Georgist journal (The
Public), Gene Debs (labor leader and Socialist candidate for President), Emil Jorgensen (prolix
but effective exposer of R.T. Ely), Warren Worth Bailey (later Georgist editor in Johnstown, PA,
and then Congressman who led in framing the pioneering income tax act of 1916), Vachel
Lindsay (poet who revered Altgeld), Carl Sandburg (liberal and poet), Florence Kelley
(outstanding social worker), George C. Olcott (publisher of annual land values blue book),
Stephen T. Mather (national parks), Harold Ickes (future Interior Secretary), et al. Upton
Sinclair, a Georgist fellow-traveler, stayed in Dunne’s Chicago long enough to win fame and
fortune with The Jungle in 1906. Two or more generations of Midwesterners fleeing from small
town Babbittry flocked to Chicago. Where Portland spawned quixotic Marxists John Reed and
Big Bill Haywood, Chicago reformers were of more practical bent.

A later Chicago spinoff was the remarkable Daniel Hoan, Mayor of Milwaukee for a record
tenure of 24 years, 1916-40. Hoan ran a restaurant in Chicago and got his law degree there,
1905-08, revering Clarence Darrow. Then he returned to his native Wisconsin to practice labor
law, at the behest of Victor Berger and other leading Socialists. Carl Sandburg came along soon
as secretary to Emil Seidel, Milwaukee’s first Socialist Mayor, 1910-12. Seidel, with Hoan as
City Attorney, pushed for “front-foot” assessments—code for the Somers System. Milwaukee
grew by 23%, 1910-20, and another 27%, 1920-30. Under Hoan, Milwaukee became known as
21

the best-governed city in America. During the Great Depression he kept collecting taxes not just
for current expenses, but for amortization funds to pay off old debts, and emerged debt-free by
1940 (Kerstein, passim; Hoan, passim).

Another Chicago spinoff was the architect and planner Walter Burley Griffin, a member of
the Chicago Single Tax Club. Griffin won a contest to design a new Capital city, Canberra, for
Australia. He set it up financially on Georgist lines and remained in Australia. In 1918 he co-
founded the Henry George Club of Melbourne”’.

Another spinoff was William Kent, with his wife, Elizabeth Thacher Kent"’, who left their
mark on Marin County, California, and the nation. Kent had been a Chicago city councilman,
and President of the Municipal Voters’ League, before moving west in 1907. There was a public
spirit gusting around The Windy City in those years. The Kents rode the updrafts by speculating
in land; but turned around and donated magnificent Redwood Canyon, now Muir Woods, to the
U.S. as a National Monument, for free public use. (There was no income tax to deduct it from at
that time.) They insisted it be named Muir Woods, rather than for themselves. A grateful public
made Kent a Congressman. He was a Progressive Republican, allied with President T.R., Gifford
Pinchot'®, Walter Fisher’, and the Conservation Movement, allied spiritually with the idea of
common land rights, urban Georgism, “The City Beautiful” movement, and public ownership
and control of public utilities. Stressing the last aspect, Kent and Pinchot were “Utilitarian
Conservationists”, causing a split with Muir, a 200% “Wilderness Conservationist”, over
developing Hetch Hetchy for public power and water supply (Nash). However, Kent sponsored
the bill that created the National Park Service in 1916, with Chicagoan Stephen T. Mather at the
head. Kent also founded the “Save the Redwoods League”.

Yet another Chicago-inspired export was Clarence Darrow’s friend James Hartness Griffes. In
politics, he used the nom de guerre “Luke North””. He named his movement “The Great
Adventure”, a long series of biennial single-tax Initiatives that peaked (but did not end) in 1916.
North’s base was San Francisco, q.v.

Rockefeller’s University of Chicago was a bastion of backwardness. Wm. Rainey Harper, the
Baptist fundamentalist whom Rockefeller installed as first head of his University of Chicago,
was not hired to brook egalitarianism, or anti-monopoly claptrap. Not until Robert Maynard
Hutchins did Chicago have a president who tolerated Georgism. John Dewey in 1904 found even
Columbia University less confining. In New York Dewey, in the midst of his educational career
at the Teacher’s College, advanced Georgist ideas and practice (for he always combined ideas

‘6 This Club, now named Prosper Australia, still thrives in its original home at 27 Hardware Lane.

” Mrs. Kent shared a middle name of distinctive spelling with Mrs. Louis F. (Alice Thacher) Post, as well as
with the Thacher School of Ojai, California, to which Kent contributed. These threads are worth pursuing.

*® Pinchot’s Georgist values suffuse his 1909 address to the first national conservation congress.

‘9 When President Wm. Howard Taft dismissed Pinchot, he replaced him with Chicagoan Walter Fisher. Fisher
backed Pinchot’s policies: Taft simply needed someone who was more tactful (Hays). One of Fisher’s sons, Arthur,
had the honor of being dismissed from the University of Montana Law School for supporting the Farmer-Labor
Party (Levine). One of his grandsons, statistician Walter Fisher, had the honor of being dismissed from Berkeley for
refusing on principle to sign the loyalty oath. Grandson Roger Fisher was a Professor of Law at Harvard,
specializing in “Getting to Yes” by tactful negotiations. It is a strong, remarkable family.

°° This was probably to avoid implicating his employer, for he was a working man, a journalist.
22

with practice) over a long career (Dewey, 1933). He helped found the Georgist Freeman
magazine, and The American Journal of Economics and Sociology, and supported the Henry
George School of Social Science. His 1933 radio address, “Steps to Economic Recovery”, is a
miniature Georgist masterpiece.

Thorstein Veblen, too, was too much for Harper. Veblen went on to a stormy and creative
career in several other venues. His 1923 book, Absentee Ownership, could have been written by
Henry George himself — except that Veblen, unlike Dewey and George, did not concern himself
with practical or political applications. His method of shocking readers into examining their
preconceptions did result in the Institutionalist school of economics, whose members are still
receptive to Georgist ideas.

Chicago in the 1890s pioneered the skyscraper. Such substitution of capital for land suggests a
de facto policy of targeting property tax assessments more on land, less on buildings. Louis
Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright, Walter Burley Griffin, and many in the Chicago School of
architects favored downtaxing buildings, if only from self-interest*'. Chicago did not develop its
highly centralized mass transit system without taxing real estate to permit of low fares, as did
Tom Johnson in Cleveland. Indeed, low transit fares and utility rates were an integral part of
single-tax ideology in those days. A city that taxes real estate without overtaxing buildings must
be taxing land values. At the same time Chicago, like San Francisco and New York, pioneered
city parks and public spaces on a grand scale, laid out in the Daniel Burnham Plan, developed
while the Georgist Edward F. Dunne was Mayor.

Chicago's consciousness of land values is shown by its being the only city to have anything
like George C. Olcott's annual Olcott’s Blue Book of Land Values, 1910-date and continuing.
Olcott used Somers’ methods to appraise a whole city, and later a whole county, every year,
using only a very small staff (including modest Robert King, long-time supporter of the Henry
George School in Chicago). Olcott also supported the Chicago Single Tax Club, and wrote
“Chicago’s Amazing Growth” for Land and Freedom, an activist Georgist journal based in New
York. Chicago inspired and supplied data for Homer Hoyt's classic One Hundred Years of Land
Values in Chicago—many of Hoyt’s values being credited to Olcott’s annual Blue Book.
Chicagoan Frederick M. Babcock's classic Valuation of Real Estate shows Somers’ influence,
separating land from building values.

Dunne brought in Tom Johnson’s Cleveland assessor, W. A. Somers, to coach Chicago
assessors on using the important “building-residual” method of separating the value of land and
buildings. Somers, recall, also worked with Lawson Purdy to apply this method in New York.

Margaret Haley was for Chicago what Lawson Purdy was for New York. Haley was not an
assessor, but head of The Chicago Teachers Federation, an independent union. She was a
devoted, persistent battler for honest assessments. She correctly saw them as a more politically
attainable means of raising revenues for teachers' salaries than raising tax rates. A Georgist, she
also saw them as a means of shifting the burden off buildings onto land. She focused her efforts
on the Loop, following the precedent of George Schilling in 1894. The baleful influence of
Richard T. Ely came to bear when his employee, Herbert D. Simpson, published Tax Racket and
Reform in Chicago, denying that Loop lands were underassessed. Considering the source, one

*1 It is reasonable to surmise that skyscraper pioneer Daniel Burnham agreed with Sullivan on this, although I
have no direct evidence of it.
23

may suspect that an ulterior motive was to undercut further support for Haley. Either way,
Margaret Haley’s crusading raised lots of revenues from landowners to pay schoolteachers and
other public employees. An associated cause of hers was to raise lease rates on grant lands
owned by the Chicago School Board in downtown Chicago. These had been let on sweetheart
terms to favored lessees, including The Chicago Tribune and other newspapers, which regularly
abused Haley for her efforts.

John Peter Altgeld lost as Governor after pardoning three of the Haymarket Riot “anarchists”
for having been unfairly tried. Unbowed by the hysteria, he returned to Chicago after 1896 and
became active in both national and Chicago city politics. The 1896 Chicago Platform of the
national Democratic Party was an Altgeld platform with strong populist and labor elements,
repudiating Grover Cleveland, fusing the silver issue with social issues. Ray Ginger believes
Altgeld might have been nominated for President, except for his foreign birth. The power elite
saw Bryan as a harmless child, with Altgeld as the brains of the fused Populist/Democratic Party.
Altgeld supported Henry George for Mayor of New York, 1897 (Barnard, pp. 418-20).

Altgeld died in 1902; Lloyd in 1903. Mayor Edward F. Dunne, an old Altgeld ally, took over
the leadership in Chicago. He was Mayor, 1905-07, and later Governor of Illinois. He had strong
single-tax leanings and connections. “...as Mayor he functioned as the disciple of Cleveland’s
Mayor Tom L. Johnson, who had earlier counted Mayor Hazen Pingree of Detroit as his mentor
..."" (Morton, p. ix). Dunne appointed single-taxer Louis F. Post to the Chicago School Board, an
independent taxing body (Schmidt, p.106), and supported Post above all others. Besides Post,
Dunne’s allies included Clarence Darrow, Jane Addams, Judge Murray Tuley, Raymond Robins,
future U.S. Senator and 1932 “Favorite Son” J. Hamilton Lewis, many union leaders, liberal
judges, some middle-class activists, and others. “[T]hey were very conscious of being part of a
national movement, and they were in close contact with Cleveland’s Mayor Tom L. Johnson,
Toledo’s Mayor Samuel M. Jones, and others.” (Morton, p.8)

It has been alleged that Lloyd clashed with Henry George as being too pushy. Perhaps, there
is always some elbowing among strong ego’s in politics. But Eugene Staley calls Lloyd “the
prominent single-taxer” (Staley, p.118). Ray Ginger refers to Lloyd as a “single-taxer”, and
when Lloyd died in 1903, four Georgists shared the memorial service: Clarence Darrow, Edward
Dunne, Cleveland Mayor Tom Johnson, and Toledo Mayor Samuel Jones (Morton, p12).

Other Dunne supporters in 1905 included Wm. Jennings Bryan, Wm. Randolph Hearst, and
Joseph Medill Patterson. Each did so for his own reasons: self-aggrandizement for Hearst,
political gratitude for Bryan, family rebellion for Patterson. The point here is that Dunne was a
national figure in his times, drawing support from many quarters.

Later Mayor William Dever, 1923-27, was Dunne’s protégé. His biographer (John Schmidt,
1989) touts him as “the mayor who cleaned up Chicago”. Even the corrupt William Thompson,
Dever’s nemesis, was growth-oriented and “open to suggestion.” Dunne, however, reports that
assessments became corrupt after 1927. This is about when Ely’s man Simpson published his
“tax racket” whitewash, and Chicago’s growth rate fell behind New York’s.

Dunne was active through 40 years. Before being Mayor, 1905-07, he was an elected Circuit
Judge of Cook County, from 1892. After being Mayor he became Governor, 1913-17. As
Governor he had the Legislature make a U.S. Senator out of his old ally, J. Hamilton Lewis. In
the 1920’s he was the power behind Senator Lewis and Mayor William Dever, allied by that time
with Charles Merriam, Clarence Darrow, Harold Ickes, Jane Addams, Donald Richberg, and
24

other national figures.

Dunne was still active in Democratic politics at the Convention of 1932. At that point,
however, the old single-tax linkage failed to join him in common cause with Al Smith and
Newton D. Baker, rival candidates, or with Clarence Darrow or Jane Addams, both also powers
in the convention. Dunne and Ickes both went over to FDR. Judge Samuel Seabury of New
York, quondam land-tax supporter and scourge of Tammany corruption, was also there as a dark-
horse (Moley, 1966, pp. 12-13; Neil, pp.158-63). Hearst, who once supported Dunne, threw his
weight against Baker, even to the extent of endorsing FDR. He disliked FDR, but he hated Baker
and Smith, with whom he had personal scores (Neal, Chapter 22, pp.273 ff.; Tugwell, p.253).
Raymond Moley, a native of Tom Johnson’s Cleveland, figured prominently in the proceedings.
He told his fellow “Brains Trusters” to read his old Progressive models like Tom Johnson,
Newton Baker, Lincoln Steffens, and Frederic Howe (Tugwell, pp. 37, 367); but he worked for
FDR against Baker. Had FDR failed, the Democratic nominee in 1932 would have been Baker,
Tom Johnson’s and Woodrow Wilson’s protégé (Cramer; Moley, 1939, p. 46; 1966, p.37; Neal,
pp. 273-75 et passim).

When Raymond Moley rose to extraordinary power with President FDR, he slammed the door
on Georgists in Washington, dismissing them as “goo-goos” (Moley, 1939, p.128), while he
followed the model of Charles Van Hise, prophet of the corporate state, and Herbert Hoover,
arranger of business cartels, or “associationism”. Moley presently left FDR, too: FDR said he
had “joined the fat cats” (Tugwell, p. xxvii). Unlike Altgeld in 1896 and 1900, these civic single-
taxers did not cross the bridge from local to national unity. Some of them sacrificed Georgist
unity for personal ambition, wealth and power. Georgism has been the poorer for it since.

There is no one individual or organization that symbolizes single-tax in Chicago. There was
rather a large group of like-minded people, obstreperously individualistic, loosely linked, many
of them famous in other ways and places, pushing for cheaper mass transit and better schools and
social work and higher taxes on land over a long period. The evidence of population growth tells
us they got results, 1890-1930. After that the Kelly-Nash machine took power, and Chicago
stopped growing. Yes, it was the depression and most cities stopped growing—except New York
City and California cities, where Georgists remained active for another 20 years.

F. San Francisco

Many cities outside the northeast quadrant were implementing growth-oriented, George-like
policies in this era. Here is a case study of one, San Francisco, to represent the genre.

Born-again San Francisco, 1907-30, makes an edifying case study in regenerative tax policy.
Its calamity of 1906 wiped out most of the city. It had no State or Federal aids to speak of. The
state of California had oil, but didn’t even tax it, as all other states do. It did have private
insurance, but so did and do other cities. It had no power to tax sales or incomes. It had no lock
on Sierra water to sell its neighbors, as now; no finished Panama Canal, as now; no regional
monopoly comparable to New Orleans’ hold on the vast Mississippi Valley. Unlike rival Los
Angeles (whose smog lay in the future) it had cold fog, cold-water beaches, no local fuel, nor
semitropical farm products, nor easy mountain passes to the east. Its rail and shipping
connections were inferior to the major rail and port and shipbuilding complex in rival Oakland,
and even to inland Stockton’s. It was hilly, moreso than any other major American city; much of
its flatter space was landfill, in jeopardy both to liquefaction of soil in another quake, and
25

precarious titles subject to the public trust doctrine (Wilmar, 1999). Its great bridges were
unbuilt—it was more island than peninsula. It was known for eccentricity, drunken sailors, tong
wars, labor strife, racism, vice, vigilantism, and civic scandals. In its hinterland, mining was
fading; irrigation barely beginning. Lumbering was far north around Eureka; wine around Napa;
deciduous fruit around San Jose. Berkeley had the State University, Sacramento the Capitol, Palo
Alto Stanford, Oakland and Alameda the major U.S. Naval supply center.

Yet, after the quake and fire of 1906, San Francisco bounced back so fast its population grew
by 22%, 1900-10, in the very wake of its destruction; it grew another 22%, 1910-20; and another
25%, 1920-30, remaining the 10" largest American city. It did this without expanding its land
base, as rival Los Angeles did; and while providing wide parks and public spaces. Far from
spreading out, it had to pull back from the treacherous filled-in level lands that had given way in
the quake and over which the State was assuming greater control (a 1909 Statute prohibits the
privatization of any tidelands or submerged lands anywhere in the State—Wilmar). On its hills
and dales it housed, and linked with mass transit, a denser population than any city except the
Manhattan Borough of New York. For a sense of its gradients, see the chase scenes from the
films Bullitt or Trench Coat. It is these people and their good works that made San Francisco so
famously livable, the cynosure of so many eyes, and gave it the massed economic power later to
bridge the Bay and the Golden Gate, grab water from the High Sierra, finance the fabulous
growth of intensive irrigated farming in the Central Valley, and become the financial, cultural,
and tourism center of the Pacific coast.

How did a City with so few assets raise funds to repair its broken infrastructure and rise from
its ashes? It had only the local property tax, and much of this tax base was burned to the ground.
The answer is that it taxed the ground itself, raising money while also kindling a new kind of fire
under landowners to get on with it, or get out of the way.

Historians have obsessed over the quake and fire, but blanked out the recovery. We do know,
though, that in 1907 San Francisco elected a reform Mayor, Edward Robeson Taylor, with a
uniquely relevant background: he had helped Henry George write Progress and Poverty in 1879.
George, Jr.’s bio of his dad calls Taylor the only one who vetted the entire MS. George’s
academic biographer, Charles Barker, credits Taylor with adding style and quality and ideas to
the work. Barker and George’s earlier academic biographer (Geiger) consider Taylor to have
been the major single influence on George. Taylor’s call for action appears on p.396, introducing
“The Application of the Remedy”. If you had helped and swayed the man writing Progress and
Poverty, and composed its call for action, and then became reform Mayor of a razed city with
nothing to tax but land value, what would you do?

Reams are in print about how Henry George was not elected Mayor of New York, but nothing
about how his colleague E.R. Taylor WAS elected Mayor of San Francisco. While George was
barnstorming New York City and the world as an outsider, Taylor stayed home and rose quietly
to the top as an insider.

In 1907, single-tax was in the air. It was natural and easy to go along with Cleveland, Detroit,
Toledo, Milwaukee, Chicago, Houston, San Diego, Edmonton, many smaller cities, and
doubtless other big cities yet to be researched, that chose to tax buildings less and land more.
Vancouver, above all, was a model and inspiration. Civic leaders seriously considered going
further. “The Commonwealth Club (San Francisco) Reports for 1914 reflect that more time was
devoted by the club to consideration of it (the single tax initiative) than any other, ... Again, as in
26

1912, much of the debate centered around the success of the tax policies of the British Columbia
cities, ...” (Echols, 1967, p.59).

It was the Golden Age of American cities when they grew like fury, and also with grace: “The
City Beautiful” was the motif, expressed in parks and expositions like San Francisco’s 1915
Panama-Pacific International Exposition. The idea of city parks, recreational land for all the
people, melded with the idea of national parks: San Francisco housed major leaders of the
movement like Franklin Lane, John Muir, William Kent, and others”

Mayor Nagin of New Orleans today pleads that Katrina wiped out most of his tax base, so he
is impotent. By contrast, in 1907 Mayor Taylor’s Committee on Assessment, Revenue, and
Taxation reported sanguinely that revenues were still adequate. How could that be? Because
before the quake and fire razed the city, 75% of its real estate tax base was already land value
(S.F. Municipal Reports, FY 1906 and 1907, p. 777). S.F. also taxed “personal” (movable)
property, but it was much less than real estate, and “secured” by land. The coterminous County
and School District used the same tax base. If we saw such a situation today we would say the
local people had adopted most of Henry George’s single tax program de facto, whether or not
they said so publicly. San Francisco was the epicenter of Luke North’s 1916 “Great Adventure”
initiative campaign for a statewide single tax—a campaign that won 31% of the State’s voters.
(Large Landholdings, 1919; Miller, 1917, p.51; Geiger, 1933, p.433; Young, p.232). From 1912-
22, North and others qualified a single-tax initiative at every biennial election (Echols, 1979,
passim). Even while "losing," such campaigns raised consciousness of the issue so that assessors
were focusing more attention on land. Thus, in California, 1917, tax valuers focused on land
value so much that it constituted 72% of the assessment roll for property taxation, statewide
(Troy, 1917b, p.398)—a much higher fraction than today.

It was a jolt to replace the lost part of the tax base by taxing land value more, but small
enough to be doable. This firm tax base also sustained S.F.’s credit to finance the great burst of
civic works that was to follow. Taylor retired in 1909, but soon laid his hands on James Rolph,
who remained Mayor for 19 years, 1911-30, a period of civic unity and public works. “Sunny
Jim” Rolph expanded city enterprise into water supply, planning, municipally owned mass
transit, the Panama-Pacific International Exposition, and the matchless Civic Center. S.F.
supplemented the property tax by levying special assessments on land values enhanced by public
works like the Stockton Street and Twin Peaks Tunnels. Good fiscal policy did not turn all the
knaves into saints, as Gray Brechin has documented in Imperial San Francisco. Rolph burned
out after 1918 or so, and fell into bad company with venal bankers and imperialist engineers. But
San Francisco still rose and throve.

G. Cincinnati, Ohio politics, and Decadence

Set against those cities with spurts of rapid growth there were others frozen in time. Lincoln
Steffens, in his “Tale of Two Cities,” contrasted Cleveland, the best-governed American city,
with Cincinnati, one of the worst, and we will do the same.

After 1890, Cincinnati poked along only slowly under its various “business-friendly”
administrations. All during the years of Tom Johnson and Newton Baker in Cleveland, and

?? Congressman Raker earned more infamy over more years than he deserved from the Raker Act that flooded
out Hetch Hetchy Canyon. He was a strong supporter of the National Park Service under Stephen T. Mather.
27

Samuel Jones and Brand Whitlock in Toledo, Cincinnati was the power base of the old Tory
guard who opposed them and all they stood for, and put Ohioans McKinley, Taft and Harding,
three of our stodgier presidents, in the White House” (Steffens; Russell, pp.131, 136, 149, 155,
174, 203, et passim; Bremner). Under their guidance, Cincinnati grew so little and shrunk so
much that it now has fewer people than it had in 1910, shriveling from 363,000 in 1910 to
331,000 in 2000 (see Table I). In April, 2001, Cincinnati erupted in destructive emeutes.

Mark Hanna of Cleveland made McKinley President, and himself Senator. Hanna enjoyed
support from the richest American, Clevelander John D. Rockefeller, and from Cincinnati bosses
Cox and Foraker, but could not control his own front yard because Johnson did (Russell, p.120).
Hanna routinely maligned Johnson, defining him as a “socialist-anarchist-nihilist.” Socialism
was the equivalent of anarchism, said Hanna, and it was an anarchist who had shot McKinley, so
there. Johnson, a native southerner, was a “carpetbagger followed by a train of all the howling
vagrants of Ohio.”

It went beyond name-calling, and beyond Hanna. “In Cleveland, as in these other (Ohio)
cities, there was organized as if by instinct a sympathetic, political-financial-social group whose
power and influence made itself known the moment it was touched...” (Hauser in Preface to
Johnson, 1911, p. xxii. See Appendix I for the complete quote).

Ohio was not alone in having such a power structure. Judge Ben Lindsey of Denver
memorably described another such case in The Beast. Ohio was unusual, though, in having Tom
Johnson. Johnson, inspired by Henry George, had the courage, skill, dedication, and personal
wealth to face The Beast and tame it.

Johnson died in 1911, but the spirit outlived the body. Single-taxers were hard at work in the
Ohio constitutional convention of 1912, pushing for direct democracy to overcome plutocratic
and boss rule. Herbert S. Bigelow was the leader; “fiery” Peter Witt was active. Like U’Ren in
Oregon they believed that the Initiative and Referendum would open the gate for the single-tax.
Journalist Yisroel Pensack examined the Proceedings of this convention. They show landowning
anti-Georgists concentrating their forces against such an outcome, to the extent that Ohio's
Constitution now provides that I&R may be used for almost any purpose EXCEPT to enact the
single tax (letter to the writer). Professor William Peirce of Case Western University confirms
Pensack (2003). Oliver Lockhart wrote that the Convention was dominated by “fear of the single
tax, which element (sic) was in control of most of the convention machinery” (1912, p.730).
Francis Coker quoted the then-new Ohio Constitution to the point (1913, p.196). Thus the
Cincinnati power group, based on a failing city, branded its mark on a whole state—while also
giving the nation three mediocre Presidents: McKinley, Taft, and Harding. Since then, Toledo
and Cleveland have joined Cincinnati on the sick list.

In upstate New York and downstate Illinois, it is the same. People there gaze with distrust on
the “anti-business” radicals and sinners in the big city, and their high property taxes, while
people and capital and businesses keep moving from the farms and small cities to the big one
(and its suburbs). Something is askew with popular perceptions of cause and effect. Data
presented herein tell a different story.

°3 Tn fairness, Taft was a cut above the other two. However, he so alienated progressive Republicans as to split
the party, and lose the election of 1912.
28

H. Are Pro-labor Mayors Bad for Business?

The population growth records herein suggest an arresting hypothesis, that left-wing
administrations are good for business—productive business, that is—and "pro-business"
administrations are bad. San Francisco and New York, with their leftwing democratic traditions,
seem to hold up well compared with other old cities. San Francisco’s recovery from the quake
and fire of 1906 was fast and impressive, under its Mayor Edward Robeson Taylor, 1907-09, and
then enduring under Mayor James Rolph, 1911-30. George’s major biographers consider Taylor
to have been the greatest single influence on George.

Mark Lause has named NYC as the focus of radical politics back to 1820 or so, during the
time it was emerging as our largest city. During this long growth period after 1820, NYC
government was collecting a large bite from land rents to support public services (Geiger, p.427).
The whole state, in fact, used land taxes to finance the Erie Canal, opened in 1825.

Even Los Angeles, with its "open-shop" reputation, came close to electing a socialist mayor,
Job Harriman, in 1913. Like Chicago and San Francisco, L.A. had natural handicaps to
overcome, and used city government for public works to raise private land values—just don’t
call it “socialism”, was the ethic of the dominant L.A. Times and its allied ruling class. L.A.
raised property taxes to spend lavishly on public water supply, public power, harbor facilities,
sewers, city-owned rails, and other public works. In 1934, L.A. voters even supported Upton
Sinclair of Pasadena for Governor. Sinclair’s “EPIC” program included a large element of
Georgist land taxation and redistribution.

As reported above, Houston, under single-tax assessor J.J. Pastoriza, grew by some 25%,
1911-15, until a court ordered him to go back to the old ways (Geiger, pp.434-35). Harris
Moody, assessor in San Diego, single-handedly used his administrative latitude to convert the
property tax to a land-value tax over several years, 1920-26, until stopped abruptly by court
order (Mahoney). At this point the city skyline froze for the next 75 years (Andelson).
Vancouver, B.C., quintupled in population, 1895-1909, after exempting first 1/2, and then 3/4 of
building values from the property tax, as described by 8-term Mayor Louis Denison “Single-tax”
Taylor (Marsh, 1911, pp.33-37; Rawson, 2000).

Detroit’s explosive growth was triggered by Mayor and Governor Hazen Pingree, battler
against railroad corporations, other land speculators, and transit monopolists. Chicago’s long
growth record came under a series of leaders who supported labor unions, education, parks, and
welfare, and made a virtue of battling monopolies, from Bradley’s “Anti-monopoly League” of
1881 and socialization of the lakefront through muckrakers Tarbell and Lloyd to the exile of
transit magnate Samuel Yerkes. Milwaukee’s rapid growth came under two avowed Socialist
Mayors, Emil Seidel and Daniel Hoan, who seized the lakefront from the rail corporations and
created vast public parks. Cleveland’s growth came under the radical anti-monopolists Tom
Johnson and Newton Baker. Toledo’s burst of growth came with single-tax Mayors Samuel
“Golden Rule” Jones and Brand Whitlock. Pioneer land assessor William A. Somers traveled
busily on loan from city to city, instructing local assessors in his Georgist techniques. Out west,
San Francisco’s swift recovery from its quake and fire began under Mayor Edward Robeson
Taylor, who had helped Henry George write Progress and Poverty in 1877-79. Vancouver’s
leader was 8-time Mayor Louis Denison “Single-tax” Taylor. In Seattle it was Mayor George F.
Cotterill, who looked to Vancouver for inspiration. In rural California it was the virtually
unknown “C.C. Wright” and “L.L. Dennett” of Modesto. I do not pursue those threads here, but
29

they surely call for review of stereotyped ideas about "pro-business" governments and "leftwing"
governments. They also refute the idea that Georgism never weighed in politics. These were not

isolated local events. The principals “were very conscious of being part of a national movement,

and they were in close contact ...” (Morton, pp. ix, 8).

I. The Puzzle of Pittsburgh

Pittsburgh is a Georgist anomaly. Urban and tax scholars routinely cite Pittsburgh, with its
“two-rate property tax plan” (lower on buildings, higher on land) to exemplify a tax-induced
growth effect roughly like what New York’s law induced. Whatever happened in Pittsburgh,
however, has not made its population rise. Its fall after 1980, especially, is steeper than most
cities in Table I.

No one publishing on Pittsburgh's Plan, pro or con, has addressed this exodus, to my
knowledge. Various studies have shown rapid building in Pittsburgh under its two-rate regime
(Cord, Oates and Schwab, Tideman and Plassmann). None of these looked at population.
Whatever the answer, champions of the Pittsburgh graded tax plan need to explain this
outmigration.

One reason for it is that Pittsburgh’s plan, compared with New York’s, is not focused on
housing. It has the effect of encouraging commercial and industrial building which might
actually take land from residential use within the city limits, while stimulating residential
demand in the suburbs. Pittsburgh is also tightly constricted in area, unlike NYC, and perhaps
should be compared with Manhattan, rather than all of NYC.

Another reason for an exodus is that Pittsburgh under Mayor Richard Caliguiri imposed a
wage tax of 4% during the 1980s. He also raised gross receipts taxes. In 1989 a new mayor,
Sophie Masloff, commissioned research by Ralph Bangs of the University of Pittsburgh to
explain the exodus from Pittsburgh, and Bangs’ respondents identified the wage tax as a major
cause (letter from Pittsburgh researcher Daniel Sullivan, 29 Dec 2000). Neither Masloff, 1989-
93, nor her successor Tom Murphy has abated the wage tax. Murphy abated taxes on certain
large businesses that agree to locate in Pittsburgh—but not on their workers.

A third reason is that the graded tax rate—lower on buildings than on land—applies only to
tax rates imposed by the City of Pittsburgh, not to the overlapping property taxes of the School
District or of the County, Allegheny. The effect on taxpayers is thus heavily diluted, so that
many of them are scarcely aware of any two-rate tax plan.

A fourth, and perhaps the weightiest reason is the least visible, in normal times: the City of
Pittsburgh does not control its own assessments the way Johnson did in Cleveland, Hoan in
Milwaukee, Purdy in NYC, and Clarkson in Southfield. The Allegheny County Assessor controls
tax valuations, and this officer has another agenda, which includes undervaluing land.
Pittsburgh's assessed land values were so low in 1999, "they weren't anywhere near reality," said
George Donatello, operations director for Sabre Systems, a contract assessment firm retained to
reassess Allegheny County in 2000 (Belko). In 2000, land was only 10% of the property tax base
in Pittsburgh: an absurdly low figure that lacks all credibility (Pittsburgh Councilman Daniel
Cohen, cited in Snowbeck).

Sabre Systems revalued Allegheny County land at triple the amount, but the powers in
Pittsburgh responded by ditching the graded tax plan. Modern crusaders for "two-rate" tax
reform resist addressing and dealing with malassessment, because they fear reassessment as a
30

political liability. Perhaps it is, but without Purdy-style assessments, the "Pittsburgh Plan," for all
its publicity, is form without substance, more nominal than real. It is tempting to "Let sleeping
dogs lie," but the reason reassessments awaken the dogs is because valuation of the tax base is
where the real bite is, and without real bite there is no real reform.

Scholarly researchers, too, have neglected malassessment, because it is messy, and the
modern academic style is to build complex econometric models that are top-heavy and fragile,
even with good firm numbers, and often impossible when the input numbers are fuzzy. Models
are mechanistic and mathematical, with no room for the attitudes and personalities of civic
leaders which, as we have seen, make a world of difference. There is wide latitude in the
assessment process, latitude that can be used either to subvert a Pittsburgh Plan, or, as in
Pastoriza's Houston, 1909-15, or Harris Moody's San Diego, 1920-26, to subvert the taxation of
buildings and move toward a de facto single-tax regime.

Pittsburgh City officials who support taxing wages are obviously not oriented toward
encouraging immigration, so the wage tax may be just one of several anti-personnel devices. The
lessons seem to be 1) that one must look at the whole of city policies, not just the apparent
structure of the property tax, to determine the overall impetus of public policy on population; 2)
Pittsburgh's officials have been more interested in favoring capital than labor; 3) where there are
two or more overlapping jurisdictions levying on property, a change in just one of them may not
amount to much; and 4) property tax reforms may be subverted by contrary assessment practices.

IV. L’Envoi

Population growth is not always a goal of civic policy. Many cities discourage immigration,
while seeking to import and retain taxable capital. Federal tax policies of recent times, shifting
more and more of the tax burden off property income and onto labor income, have diluted or
offset normal local incentives to attract people. Population, however, is surely one measure of
city health, even from the particularistic local view: a thriving city attracts people.

From a distributive and full-employment view—the one taken here—it is vital to the interests
of labor to have cities vie to attract people by fostering good use of their land. That is, indeed, the
main point of Progress and Poverty, George’s major work. Competition for people is also vital
to the interests of all people as consumers, especially of housing. In this neo-Malthusian era, it is
useful to point out the obvious, that luring people from city A to city B is a zero-sum game, from
a national population view. Indeed, luring people from farms to cities generally lowers overall
birthrates.

"Labor" as used here includes most people: everyone except passive-aggressive landowners.
As to the last, however, the rise of land prices in NYC (which C.J. Post and Pleydell and Wood
document), and their fall in torpid cities and neighborhoods, says that landowners, too, gain from
urban health and vigor. As to savers, and active investors in new buildings, and other productive
entrepreneurs, interurban competition tends to raise the marginal rate of return on capital, too.
How is all this good news possible? A healthy economy generates surpluses that belie the
Chicago School slogan that “There is no free lunch.” Land rents are the free lunch, the substance
of Nature’s bounty and the evidence of things unseen. The question for us is who will get them,
and how use them.
31

TABLE I: Populations, NYC and Comparison Cities, 1890-2000, Ranked by 1900 populations
Source: U.S. Census of Population, Decennial Volumes, Population in (000)

Growth rates are decennial, in percentages

City 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000}
INYC-5 borough” 2705) 3437| 4767 5620} 6930) 7455] 7892 7782 7895 7072 7323 me
Rate/dec. 27.1 38.7 17.9 23.3 7.6| 5.9 -1.4 1.5) -10.4| 3.6 9.

Chicago 1100 1698 2185 2702 3376| 3397| 3621 3550 3367, 3005] 2784| 2896)
Rate/dec. 54.4 28.7 23.7 24.9) 0.67] 6.6] -2| -5.2| -10.8} -7.4 4.0
Philadelphia 1047 1294 1549 1824 1951 1931 2072 2002 1949 1688 1586 1518
Rate/dec. 23.6} 19.7 17.7] 7 -1 7.3 -3.4| -2.7| -13.4| -6| -4.3
St Louis 452 575| 687 773 822 816 857 750} 622 453) 394 348
Rate/dec. 27.2 19.5 12.5) 6.3) -0.7| 5.0} -12.5| -17.1 -27.2| -13 -11.7
IBoston 448 561) 670 748 781 771 801 697 641 563} 574 589}
Rate/dec. 25.2 19.4 11.6| 4.4 -1.3 3.9 -13) -8 -12.2 2 2.6]
[Baltimore 434 509| 558) 733} 805 859 950 939 906 787 736 65]
Rate/dec. 17.3 9.6] 31.4 9.8} 6.7 10.6 -1.2 -3.5 -13.1 -6.5 -11.5|
Pittsburgh 239 452 533) 588 670 672 677 604 520 423) 370 335
Rate/dec. 89.1 17.9 10.3 14 0.3} 0.7 -10.8} -13.9| -18.7 -12.5 -9.5)
Cleveland 261 382 562) 797 900 878 915 876 751 574 506 478
Rate/dec. 46.4 47.1 41.8} 12.9 -2.4 4.2 -4.3} -14.3 -23.6| -11.8| -5.5|

*4 Including the 4 boroughs added after 1890.
32

City 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Buffalo 256 352) 423 507 573) 576 580 533} 463 357 328 293
Rate/dec. 37.5 20.2| 19.9 13 0.52 0.69 -8.1 -13.1 -22.9| -8.1 -10.7
IS Francisco 299 343} 417 507 634 635] 775 740| 716 679 724 777|
Rate/dec. 14.7, 21.6 21.6] 25) 0.16 22| -4.5) -3.2| -5.2| 6.6] 7.3
(Cincinnati 297 326 363 401 451 456 504 503} 453 385 364 33]
Rate/dec. 9.8} 11.3 10.5) 12.5 1.1 10.5 -0.2| -9.9| -15| -5.5 -9.1
Detroit 205 286 466 994| 1569 1623} 1850 1670 1511 1203 1028 95]
Rate/dec. 39.5 63 113 58 3.4 14 -9.7| -9.5 -20.4| -14.6| -7.5|
Milwaukee” 204 285 373 457 578 587 637 741 717 636 628 597]
Rate/dec. 39.7] 30.9| 22.5 26.5) 1.6 8.5) 16.3 -3.2| -11.3} -1.3 -4.9
INewark 182) 246 347 414 442 430 439 405) 382 329 278 27.

Rate/dec. 35.2 41.1 19.3 6.8 -2.7| 2.1 -7.7| -5.7| -13.9| -15.5 ”
Jersey City 164| 206 268 298 316 301) 299 276 261 224 228 240
Rate/dec. 25.6 30.1 11.2 6 -4.7| -0.7| -7.7| -5.4 -14.2 1.8 5.3}
Minneapolis 165 203} 301 381) 464| 492 522 482 434 371 368 383
Rate/dec. 23 48.3 26.6] 21.8) 6 6.1 -7.7| -10| -14.5| -0.8) 4.1
Providence 132 176 224 238 253 254 249 207 179) 157| 161 174
Rate/dec. 33.3 27.3 6.3} 6.3) 0.4| -2| -16.9| -13.5 -12.3} 2.5 8.1
IKansas City 133) 164 248 324 400) 399| 457 475 507 448 435 442
Rate/dec. 23.3 51.2 30.6} 23.5] -0.25| 14.5 3.9 6.7 -11.6| -2.9| 1.6

°5 Milwaukee annexed much land in the 1950's, under Mayor Frank Zeidler.
33

City 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
IRochester 133) 163} 218 296 328 325] 332 318 296 242 231 220
Rate/dec. 22.6 33.7 35.8} 10.8 -0.9 2.1 -4.2| -6.9| -18.2 -4.5 -4.8)
St. Paul 133) 163} 215 235 272 288 311 313 310 270 272 287
Rate/dec 23 32 9.3 16) 5.9 8.0 0.6 -0.1 -13} 0.7 5.5
(Columbus 88 126] 181) 237 291 306 376 471 540 564 633 71]
Rate/dec. 43.2 43.7 30.9 22.8) 5.2 22.9) 25.3} 14.6 4.4 12.2 12.3}
[Toledo 81 132 168) 243 291 282 304 318 384 355 333 314
Rate/dec. 63 27.3 44.6| 19.8 -3.1 7.8 4.6 20.8) -7.6| -6.2| -5.7]
Syracuse 88 108} 137 172 209 206 221 216 197 170] 164 147
Rate/dec. 22.7| 26.9) 25.6 21.5) -1.5 7.3 -2.3} -8.8) -13.7 -3.5 10.4
INew Haven 86 108} 134| 163} 163) 161 164| 152 126] 130) 124]
Rate/dec. 25.6 24.1 21.6] 0 -1.2 1.9 -7.3} 3.2 -4.6|
Paterson 78 105) 126] 135] 139 140] 139) 144| 145) 138] 141 149)
Rate/dec. 34.6 20) 7.1 3 0.7 -0.7| 3.6 0.7 -4.8) 2.2 5.7
ILos Angeles 50} 102] 319 577 1238 1504 1970 2479| 2816 2966 3485) 3695)
Rate/dec. 104 212.7 80.9 114.6 21.5) 31 25.8} 13.6 5.3} 17.5 6.0
Albany 95 94 100) 113) 127 131 135) 130] 96
Rate/dec. -1.1 6.4 13 12.4 3.2 3.1 -3.7|

Portland, OR 46 90) 207 258 301 305 374 373 380 368 437 529]
Rate/dec 96) 130 25 17 1.3 23 -0.3 1.9 -13} 19 21.1
Dayton 61 85) 117 152 200 211 262? 262 244 203 182) 166
Rate/dec. 39.5 37.6| 29.9 31.6 5.5] 24.2?| 0 -6.9| -16.8} -10.3 -8.8)

34

°6 Grew by annexation in 1940.

City 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Seattle 43 81 237 315 366 368} 468 557 531 494 516 563
Rate/dec 88 193 33 16) 6 27 19 -4.7 -7| 4.4 9.1
Hartford” 53 80 99 138] 164| 166] 177 162 158) 136] 140) 122
Rate/dec. 50.9} 23.8) 39.4 18.8 1.2 6.6] -8.5] -2.5 -13.9| 2.9 -12.9
[Yonkers 32 48 80 100] 135 143) 153) 191 204 195] 188) 196
Rate/dec. 50| 66.7 25) 35] 5.9 7 24.8) 6.8) -4.4| -3.6| 4.3}
Akron 28 43 69 208 255 245 275 290 275 237 223 217
Rate/dec. 53.6 60.5 201.4 22.6] -3.9| 12.2 5.5] -5.2| -13.8} -5.9| -2.7]
IMAJOR BOROUGHS

OF NYC

[Manhattan 1513 1856 2331 2284| 1867 1890} 1960

Rate/dec. 22.7| 25.6] -2 -18.3 1.2 3.7]

[Brooklyn 806 1167 1634 2018} 2580) 2698} 2738)

Rate/dec. 44.8| 40| 23.5 27.8) 4.6 1.5)

[Bronx 201 431 732) 1265 1394 1451

Rate/dec. 114.4 69.8 72.8) 10.2 4.1

Queens 152 284 469 1079 1297 1550

Rate/dec. 86.8 65.1 130.1 20.2| 19.5

35

City 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
(GROUPS OF CITIES

INY State-4?” 572 717 878 1088 1237 1238 1242 756
Rate/dec. 25.4 22.5] 23.9) 13.7 0.1 0.3}

IMajor Mid-Atlantic” 2147 2648} 3135) 3706] 3953) 3976] 4236 3056)
Rate/dec. 23.3 18.4 18.2 6.7 0.6| 6.5)

INJersey Nbors of NYC” 424| 557 741 847 897 871 877 663)
Rate/dec. 31.4 33 14.3 5.9 -2.9 0.7

°’ Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester, Albany

28 Boston, Providence, New Haven, Philadelphia, Baltimore

°° Newark, Jersey City, Patterson
APPENDIX I: Hauser on Methods of Social Ostracism
Elizabeth J. Hauser, editing and prefacing Johnson's autobiography, contributed this insight:

"In Cleveland, as in these other (Ohio) cities, there was organized as if by instinct a
sympathetic, political-financial-social group whose power and influence made itself known the
moment it was touched. It included the banks and trust companies with their directors. Banks
that did not sympathize with this conspiracy were coerced by fear into compliance with the will
of the stronger institutions. Through the banks, manufacturers, wholesale and retail merchants
were reached. Business men who openly sympathized with the low-fare movement were called
to the directors’ rooms in the banks and advised, sometimes in guarded language, that their loans
might be called or their credit contracted. ... cowed at meetings of the Chamber of Commerce ...
threatened with boycott. The lawyers were almost a unit. At one time fourteen of the leading law
firms of the city were employed against the movement. Many physicians and in a large measure
the clergy were affiliated with this class. ... all who were seeking favor socially, professionally or
commercially, lined up with Privilege.

"The newspaper persecution of Mr. Johnson was not confined to Cleveland. A publicity
bureau supplied the country papers of the State with material ...

"To all of this was added the power of social ostracism. It was carried into the clubs and
employed against all who distantly believed in or liked Mr. Johnson.

"For the greater part of nine years,' writes Frederic C. Howe, ‘Cleveland was an armed camp.
There was but one line of division. It was between those who would crucify Mr. Johnson and all
of his friends, and those who believed in him. ... If any kind of cruelty, any kind of coercion, any
kind of social, political or financial power was left untried in those years to break the heart of
Mr. Johnson, I do not know what or when it was™ (Johnson, p. xxii).
37

APPENDIX II: Questions wanting further research.

1. Urbanization in the northeastern U.S. was very rapid during the 1890-1900 depression. In
sharp contrast, urbanization stopped cold in the 1930-40 depression (except in NYC, where it
just slowed down). This dead stop was hardly due to suburbanization in that era of no-growth.
The difference between the two depressions calls for some explanation. In the “dirty ‘thirties,”
apparently people returned to marginal farms, for survival. What was different in the 1890s?”

2. Urbanization revived weakly, 1940-50, but de-urbanization began after 1950 or so, and
after 1960 turned into a rout, led by the Interstate Highway System. NYC resisted this 20 years
longer than most other cities.

3. Meantime, a new kind of quasi-urbanization at low densities and high auto-dependency was
taking over the south and southwest, as exemplified by our one data set from there, for Los
Angeles. (Many newer cities are of much lower density than L.A. and its suburbs, in spite of
their reputation.) This also led to rapid growth in a few eastern cities specializing in autos and
components: Detroit, Akron, and Dayton, which, however, began shrinking even while the auto
boom was rising.

4. New cities have grown so fast that the minimum population required to be among the “top
100 cities” keeps rising, decade by decade. Thus U.S. cities, on the whole, have not
“disappeared” so much as they have migrated, lowered their densities, disintegrated, and
changed their settlement patterns.

5. Columbus has been a “sleeper,” growing quietly from 88,000 in 1890 to 633,000 in 1990,
becoming the largest city in Ohio. One reason is extensive annexation of and/or mergers with
areas already populated. Further explanation is not attempted here.

°°To trace this back through the several depressions of the 19th Century, see the 1940 Census of Population, Vol.
I, by state. This source gives city populations from 1790-1940. Susan Carter and Richard Sutch’s 2006 compendium
of historical data also has this information, updated to 1990.
38

Bibliography
Addams, Jane, 1935. My Friend, Julia Lathrop. NY: Macmillan, and later reprints.
Altgeld, John Peter, 1899. Live Questions. Chicago: Geo. S. Bowen and Sons.

Andelson, Robert, ca. 1970. “The Day They Froze San Diego's Skyline”. MS for an address to
San Diego Womens' Club.

Anderson, Douglas Firth, 1994. “'A True Revival of Religion’: Protestants and the San Francisco
Graft Prosecutions, 1906-09”. Religion and American Culture 4:1 (Winter):25-49.

Arnott, Richard (ed.), 1994. Public Economics: Selected Papers by William S. Vickrey.
Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press

Babcock, Frederick M., 1932. The Valuation of Real Estate. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bangs, Ralph, 1989. Report to Pittsburgh Mayor Sophie Masloff on causes of exodus of jobs
from Pittsburgh. University of Pittsburgh.

Barker, Charles Albro, 1955. Henry George. New York: Oxford University Press.
Barnard, Harry, 1938. Eagle Forgotten. NY: Duell, Sloan & Pearce.

Belko, Mark, 2001. “Big surprises in city's land tax increases.” Pittsburgh, The Post-Gazette, 12
January.

Bemis, Edward L., 1899. “Detroit's Effort to Own her Street Railways.” Municipal Affairs III,
475, September.

Bradley, Alexander Stuart, 1881. Report of the Present Status of the Claims of the Illinois
Central Railroad to the Lake Front, and Submerged Lands Adjoining, under the “Lake Front
Steal” of 1869 Chicago: Illinois Anti-Monopoly League.

Brechin, Gray, 1999. Imperial San Francisco. Berkeley and L.A., U.C. Press.

Bremner, Robert H., 1995. George and Ohio's Civic Revival. Edited, with an Introduction, by
Will and Dorothy Burnham Lissner. NY: The Robert Schalkenbach Foundation
(Compendium of articles originally published in the AJES, 1948-56).

Brownell, Blaine A., 1983. “Interpretations of Twentieth-Century Urban Progressive Reform.”
In Colburn and Pozzetta, pp.3-23.

Bryce, James, 1891. The American Commonwealth. London: Macmillan and Co. 2nd Edition
Revised. Vols. I, II.

Chernow, Ron, 1990. The House of Morgan NY: The Atlantic Monthly Press.

Coker, Francis W., 1913. “The Administration of Local Taxation in Ohio.” AAAPSS XLVII:182-
98, May.

Colburn, David R., and George Pozzetta, (eds.), 1983. Reform and Reformers in the Progressive
Era. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Colburn, David R., 1983. “Al Smith and the New York State Factory Investigating Commission,
1911-1915.” In Colburn and Pozzetta, pp. 25-46.

Cord, Steven, 1970-2001, Incentive Taxation, monthly.
39

Cornick, Philip, 1938. Premature Subdivision and its Consequences. NY: Intitute of Public
Administration, Columbia University.

Cramer, Clarence H., 1961. Newton D. Baker, A Biography. Cleveland and NY: The World
Publishing Company.

Crosby, Ernest, 1906. “Golden Rule” Jones, Mayor of Toledo. Chicago: The Public Publishing
Company.

Dewey, John, 1933. “Steps to Economic Recovery”. Radio address over WEVD, New York,
April 28. Distributed by the Robert Schalkenbach Foundation, 2006.

Dickinson, Don N., 1891, cited in Pingree, 1895. Dickinson was a lawyer serving pro bono,
representing the Detroit Council at the Michigan Legislature.

Dunne, Edward F., 1896. “On Inequality (of) Tax Assessments.” Address to Single Tax Club,
Chicago, 1 February 1896. In Sullivan, Wm. L., (compiler and ed.), 1916, Dunne: Judge,
Mayor, Governor. Chicago: The Windermere Press, p.85.

Dunne, Edward F., 1933. Illinois. Vols. I-V. Chicago: Lewis Publishing Company.

Echols, James, 1967. “Jackson Ralston and the California Single Tax Campaign, 1933-38”. MA
Thesis, Department of History, Fresno State College.

Echols, James, 1979. "Jackson Ralston and the Last Single Tax Campaign." California History,
58(3): Fall: 256-63.

Fisher, Ernest M., and B.F. Smith, 1932. Michigan Business Studies 4(5):Ann Arbor, University
of Michigan Press.

Fisher, Ernest M., 1933. “Speculation in Suburban Lands”. AER 23 (Supplement): 152-62.

Fitch, Robert, 1985. “The Family Subway”. Research in Political Economy, 8:163-200.

Fitch, Robert, 1993. The Assassination of NY. London, New York: Verso.

Fragnoli, Raymond R., 1982. The Transformation of Reform: Progressivism in Detroit - and
After, 1912-33. NY: Garland Publishers Inc.

Friedman, Milton, and George Stigler, 1946. “Roofs or Ceilings? The Current Housing
Problem”. Foundation for Economic Education, Popular Essays on Current Problems 1:(2),
Irvington-on-Hudson, pp. 54-65.

Gaffney, Mason, 1969. "Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy." AJES 28(2):131-44,
April. Republished in Charles J. Meyers and Dan Tarlock (eds.), Water Resource
Management: a Law School Case Book, Stanford Law School. Republished in part in Jesse
Dukeminier and James Krier (eds.) Property. Boston: Little, Brown, 1981. .

Gaffney, Mason, 2006. “Repopulating New Orleans”. Dollars and Sense, March-April 2006. Rpt
as a monograph by The American Institute for Economic Research, Great Barrington, 2006.

Gaffney, Mason, 1956-date, series of articles on urban renewal available on
<http://www.masongaffney.org> website.

Gaffney, Mason, 2000. Henry George, Dr. Edward McGlynn, and Pope Leo XIII. New York:
The Robert Schalkenbach Foundation

40

Geiger, George R., 1933. The Philosophy of Henry George. With an Introduction by John
Dewey. NY: The Macmillan Co.

George, Henry, 1879. Progress and Poverty. Rpt 1929. New York: The Modern Library.

George, Henry, Jr., 1900. The Life of Henry George. NY: RSF, 1943. Orig. copyrighted by HG,
Jr., 1900.

George, Henry, Jr., 1911. Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, June 10. Rpt. 1913 in
Great Debates in American History Vol. 10, Chapter II, New York: Current Literature
Publishing Company. Rpt in Progress, Sept-Oct 2006.

Ginger, Ray, 1958. Altgeld's America. NY: Funk and Wagnalls Company.

Graham, Otis L., Jr., 1971. The Great Campaigns: Reform and War in America, 1900-1928.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Grenier, Judson A., 1983. “Muckraking the Muckrakers: Upton Sinclair and his Peers.” In
Colburn and Pozzetta, pp. 71-92.

Haig, Robert Murray, 1915. Some Probable Effects of the Exemption of Improvements from
Taxation in the City of New York. A Report Prepared for the Committee on Taxation of the
City of New York.

Haley, Margaret A., 1982. Battleground: the Autobiography of Margaret A. Haley. [Robert L.
Reid (ed.).] Urbana: Univ. of Ill. Press. (Orig. ca. 1935.) (See also Murphy, Marjorie).

Hammack, David, 1982. Power and Society: Greater New York at the Turn of the Century NY:
Russell Sage Foundation.

Hays, Samuel P., 1967. Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

“Henley, Albert, 1969. "Land Value Taxation by California Irrigation Districts." In Arthur
Becker (ed.), Land and Building Taxes. Madison: UW Press, pp. 137-45.

Hoan, Daniel, 1936. City Government. NY: Harcourt, Brace and Company.
Holli, Melvin G., 1969. Reform in Detroit. NY: Oxford Univ. Press.

Hood, Clifton, 1993. 722 Miles: The Building of the Subways and How They Transformed New
York NY: Simon and Schuster.

Hotelling, Harold, 1938. “The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation and of
Railway and Utility Rates.” Econometrica 6:242-69.

Howe, Frederic C., 1925. Confessions of a Reformer. NY: Scribner's.

Hoyt, Homer, 1933. One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago, 1833-1933. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Ickes, Harold L., 1943. Autobiography of a Curmudgeon. New York: Reynal and Hitchcock.
Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1894. 8th Biennial Report. Springfield; also 2™ Ed., 1896
Illinois Central Railroad Co. v. Illinois, 1892, 146 U.S. 387.

Issel, Wm., and Robert W. Cherney, 1986. San Francisco: 1865-1932. Berkeley: U of Cal Press.
41

Jackson, Kenneth, (ed.), 1995. The Encyclopedia of New York City-entry on the Subways. New
Haven: Yale Univ Press.

Jacobs, Jane, 1969. The Economy of Cities. NY: Vintage Books.
Jacobs, Jane, 1984. Cities and the Wealth of Nations. NY: Random House.

Johnson, Kenneth. 1968. Life and Times of Edward Robeson Taylor. Book Club of California:
#129.

Johnson, Tom Loftin, 1913. My Story. Elizabeth J. Hauser (Ed.). New York: B.W. Huebsch.
Orig. 1911, Columbia Sterling Publishing Co.

Jones, Samuel M., 1899. The New Right. NY: Eastern book concern.

Kerstein, Edward S., 1966. Milwaukee's All-American Mayor: Portrait of Daniel Webster Hoan.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall Inc.

Large Landholdings in Southern California (A Report on), with Recommendations, 1919. Issued
by California Commission on Immigration and Housing. Sacramento: California State
Printing Office.

Lause, Mark. “Labor Insurgency for Land Reform: The Antebellum Prelude to Henry George's
United Labor Party Movement.” MS prepared for Ed O'Donnell (ed.), Henry George One
Hundred Years Later, Proceedings of a Conference held in 1997, in process.

Lear, Linda, 1981. Harold L. Ickes: the Aggressive Progressive. New York and London: Garland
Publishing, Inc.

Leidenberger, Georg, 2006. Chicago’s Progressive Alliance. De Kalb: Northern Illinois
University Press

Levine, Louis Lorwin, 1919. The Taxation of Mines in Montana. NY: B.W. Huebsch.
Lindsey, Ben B., and Harvey J. O'Higgins, 1910. The Beast. NY: Doubleday, Page & Co.
Lockhart, Oliver C., 1912. “Taxation in Ohio.” AER II:729-30, September.

Lorenz, Carl, 1911. Tom L. Johnson, Mayor of Cleveland. NY: The A.S. Barnes Co.
Lovett, Wm. P., 1930. Detroit Rules Itself. Boston: Richard G. Badger.

Mahoney (Franklin B.) v. City of San Diego, 198 Cal. 390. Appeal from judgment of superior
court of S.D. Cnty, S.M. Marsh, Judge. Affirmed, 1926.

Marling, Alfred E., Chairman, 1916. Final Report of the Committee on Taxation of the City of
New York. New York: The O'Connell Press.

Marsh, Benjamin C., 1911. Taxation of Land Values in American Cities. New York.
Marsh, Benjamin C., 1953. Lobbyist for the People, Wash: Public Affairs Press.

Miller, Joseph Dana (ed.), 1917. Single Tax Yearbook. NY: Single Tax Review Publishing
Company.

Miller, Joseph Dana (ed.), 1924-43, Land and Freedom, bimonthly.

Miller, Ross, 1996. Here's the Deal: the Buying and Selling of a Great American City. NY: A.A.
Knopf.
42

Moley, Raymond, 1939. After Seven Years. NY and London: Harper & Brothers Publishers.
Moley, Raymond, 1966. The First New Deal. NY: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.

Morton, Richard A., 1997. Justice and Humanity: Edward F. Dunne, Illinois Progressive.
Carbondale and Edwardsville: SIU Press.

Murphy, Marjorie, 1981. “Taxation and Social Conflict: Teacher Unionism and Public School
Finance in Chicago, 1898-1934. J of the Ill State Historical Society 74:242-60 (Based on the
journals of Margaret Haley, q.v.).

Murray, John F.N., 1969. Principles and Practice of Valuation, 4th Ed. Revised and Enlarged.
Australia: Commonwealth Institute of Valuers.

Nash, Roderick, 1967. “John Muir, William Kent, and the Conservation Schism”. Pacific
Historical Review 36:423-33.

Neal, Steve, 2004. Happy Days are Here Again! The Democratic Convention of 1932. New
York: William Morrow.

Nevins, Allan (ed.), 1936. Letters and Journal of Brand Whitlock. New York & London: D.
Appleton-Century Co., Inc.

New York Times, March 14, 1938, “Clarence Darrow Is Dead in Chicago” .

Nixon, Garry, 1997. "Canada". In Robert Andelson (ed.), Land-Value Taxation Around the
World, 2" Ed. New York: Robert Schalkenbach Foundation, pp.65-76

Noble, Ransom E., Jr., 1949. “Henry George and the Progressive Movement.” AJES 8(3):259-69.

Oates, Wallace, and Robert Schwab, 1997. “The Impact of Urban Land Taxation: the Pittsburgh
Experience.” National Tax Journal 50:1-21.

Odell, Kerry A., and Marc D. Weidenmier, 2002. “Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: the S.F.
Earthquake and the Panic of 1907”. Cambridge: NBER Working Paper #9176.

Olcott, George C. 1910-40. Olcott's Land Values Blue Book of Chicago. Annual volumes. 1941-
date, Olcott's Land Values Blue Book of Chicago and Suburbs. Annual volumes. Chicago:
George C. Olcott Publishers.

Olcott, George C., 1942. “Chicago's Amazing Growth”. Land and Freedom Vol. 42
January/February, p.15.

Peirce, William S., 2003. "The Progressives and the Property Tax: Ohio's Constitutional
Convention of 1912," paper presented at the Public Choice Society meetings, March 21-23,
2003, Nashville, Tennessee.

Pinchot, Gifford, 1909. Address printed in Proceedings, First Annual National Conservation
Congress, rpt Graham, 1971, q.v.

Pingree, Gov. Hazen S., 1897. Message of Gov. HSP to the 39th Leg of Michigan, Jan. 6.
Lansing: State Printers.

Pingree, Hazen, 1895. Facts and Opinions. Detroit: F.B. Dickinson Co.
43

Pleydell, Albert, and Elizabeth Wood, 1960. How Tax Exemption Broke the Housing Deadlock
in New York City. New York: Citizens' Housing and Planning Council of New York, Inc.
(CHPC).

Polak, Edward, 1924, “The NY Tax Exemption Law.” In Emil O. Jorgensen (ed.), Report of the
National Tax Relief Convention. Chicago: Manufacturers and Merchants Federal Tax League,
pp.25-32.

Polak, Edward. 1915. “Reduction of Tax on Buildings in the City of New York.” Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science 58: 183-88. .

Pollock, Walter William, and Karl W. H. Scholz. 1926. The Science and Practice of Urban Land
Valuation: An Exposition of the Somers Unit System. Philadelphia: Manufacturer's Appraisal
Co.

Post, Charles Johnson, 1984. How NY solved its housing crisis. NY: Robert Schalkenbach
Foundation. Excerpts from a pamphlet, 1951, “What Private Enterprise Can Do”. NY:
American Association for Scientific Taxation, Inc.

Post, Louis F., ca. 1927. “Living a Long Life Over Again.” Microfilm of typewritten ms.
Original is in Library of Congress.

Post, Louis F., 1915. The Taxation of Land Values. 5th Edition. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill
Company Publishers.

Purdy Papers, 1931-44. Archive of letters of Lawson Purdy, in files of the Robert Schalkenbach
Foundation, New York.

Purdy, Lawson, 1929. The Assessment of Real Estate. 4th Ed. NY: National Municipal League,
Technical Pamphlet Series No. 1.

Rawson, Mary, 1990-2000. Series of articles and papers on Mayor Louis Denison “Single-tax”
Taylor, and his impact on Vancouver, B.C.

Rawson, Mary, 2000/2001 Winter. “Eight Times Mayor of Vancouver”. 'Single Tax' Taylor:
Louis Denison Taylor 1857-1946. B.C. Historical News 34(1):22-26.

Rhodes, Benjamin F., 1943. "The Thirsty Land." Ph.D. dissn., UC Berkeley.

Russell, Francis, 1968. The Shadow of Blooming Grove: Warren G. Harding and His Times. NY:
McGraw-Hill Book Co.

Rybeck, Walter, 2000. “The United States.” In Robert Andelson (ed.), Land Value Taxation
around the World. Supplement to The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
59(5):137-84.

San Francisco Muncipal Reports for FY 1905-06 and FY 1906-07, ending June 30, 1907. S.F.:
Neal Pub Co. (Kept in S.F. Public Library, local history room.).

Schmidt, John R., 1989. “The Mayor who Cleaned Up Chicago”: A Political Bio of Wm. E.
Dever. Dekalb: Northern II] Univ. Press.

Simpson, Herbert D., 1930. Tax Racket and Reform in Chicago. Chicago: The Institute for
Economic Research, Northwestern University.

Smallwood, Charles A., 1978, The White Front Cars of S.F. Glendale: 1978.
44

Snowbeck, Christopher, 2001. “Murphy: Land tax values illogical.” Pittsburgh, the Post-Gazette,
15 January.

Somers, William A., orig. 1901. The Valuation of Real Estate for the Purpose of Taxation. St.
Paul, Minn.: orig. W.A. Somers; later eds. by Rich and Clymer.

Staley, Eugene, 1930. History of the Illinois State Federation of Labor. Chicago: U of C Press.
UC Social Sci Studies #XV.

Steffens, Lincoln, 1906. “Ohio: A Tale of Two Cities.” In his The Struggle for Self-government.
NY: McClure Phillips & Co.

Steffens, Lincoln, 1931. Autobiography. New York: Harcourt Brace.

Tideman, Nicolaus, and Florenz Plassmann, 2000. “A Markov Chain Monte Carlo Analysis of
the Effect of Two-Rate Property Taxes on Construction”, Journal of Urban Economics 47
(March 2000) pp. 216-47.

Tobin, Eugene, 1974. “The Progressive as Single Taxer: Mark Fagan and the Jersey City
Experience, 1900-1917.” AJES 33:287-97. .

Tugwell, Rexford G., 1968. The Brains Trust. NY: Viking Press.

Warner, Hoyt Landon, 1964. Progressivism in Ohio, 1897-1917. Columbus: Ohio State
University Press.

Whitlock, Brand, 1925. 40 Years of It. NY: Appleton.

Wilhelm, Donald, 1942. “Henry Ford Talks about War and your Future”. Liberty Magazine,
September 5, pp.12 ff.

Wilmar, Michael, 1999. “The Public Trust Doctrine”. From San Francisco Planning and Urban
Research Association (SPUR) Report #380, www.spur.org.

Young, Arthur N., 1916. History of the Single Tax Movement in the United States. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
