“Greater Social Benefits From our National Forests"
An Address by
Mason Gaffney
to the
Western Timber Association
Meeting in San Francisco, March 4, 1977
Reproduced by the Western Timber Association, 1977, pp. 1-20.

A. Why do Economists Pick on the Forest Service?

1. You probably never heard of the Gaffney Quartet, but when I was a young sapling, 30
years ago or so, four of us used to avoid studying by singing together. If only the baritone had
gotten sick, we might have gone on to become the Gaffney Trio and you never would have heard
of the Kingston Trio. Nor would you have been bothered with the Faustmann Formula. However,
fate ruled otherwise; it was the bass who got sick so we recruited a substitute. He was rather
good but terribly bossy, with lots of good suggestions for us all. Better a mediocre Gaffney
Quartet, said I to myself, than a top-notch Jones Quartet so we immediately sensed survival was
at stake and froze him out. Nobody loves a kibitzer.

So why, now, do economists kibitz on the Forest Service?

Actually, you don't know how lucky you are. We've hardly begun to kibitz. Only a few of us
have looked at it. Most economists have been preoccupied with other questions. Newspaper
reporters have been likened to blackbirds. That is, when one flies over to a wire they all follow
along. Economists are like that, too. For years and years, if you were a resource economist your
subject was water and you dumped on the Army Corps of Engineers, an easy target which was
always boondoggling away the taxpayers' capital. (Parenthetically, in this year of drought, if you
think the economists were wrong, I remind you that the Army Engineers builds flood control
units.) For a long time the economists’ scolding seemed futile. The pork barrel rolled on
unperturbed. But now, suddenly, all the years of effort may be getting results if the Carter
Administration sticks to its recently announced cutbacks.

Then it became the environment and of course it still is. And now energy may take over and
all the blackbirds may sit on that wire for awhile.

And yet I wouldn't count on the Forest Service's continuing to be ignored. There are other
straws in the wind. Marion Clawson and Paul S. Samuelson have two of the sharpest pairs of
antennae in the profession. (How do you think they got to the top?) When they both condemn the
Forest Service in the same year they have spotted a trend and are leading it. You can count on an
army behind them. You've heard about Marx's reserve army of the unemployed. In this age of
higher education we've improved on that. Nowadays we combat unemployment by seeing that a
man can get a Ph.D. before he has to apply for welfare. So there are a lot of underutilized troops
out there looking for trouble and you may expect the Forest Service to receive its share.

2. Economists will not pick on the Forest Service in any discriminatory way that should be
cause for paranoia. Economists pick on lots of wastrels.

That is their job. In this overspecialized world we have created many professions whose
practitioners become monomaniacs and fundamentalists. The world is full of them. They define
professional "standards" which are preceded by the word "good." Thus, good planning means
curbs and gutters, gold plated subdivisions, wide streets, large lots, expensive housing—anything
that you would do if cost were no object. That is about what "good forestry" means. There are
also "good professional standards" in medicine, theater, music, the arts, teaching, (that's my sin,
if you want to strike back), highway transportation, conservation and outdoor recreation, civil
engineering, mining engineering, reservoir engineering, farming, athletics, and, of course,
military defense.

In every case "good" comes to mean what you would do if cost were no object, if you had
unlimited resources at your disposal; if the whole world were there only to serve you because
you are sacred and they are profane.

When we are younger and less specialized and all in school together, we instinctively reject
the self-righteousness of those who feel that they are exempt from and above the standards by
which ordinary people are judged. But as we become professionalized and specialized we all
become guilty of succumbing to the temptation of forwarding such claims, even though this
mans that every profession tends to invade the resources and territory of every other profession.

That, of course, is why every company has to have its accountants and its budget officers. it is
why the U.S. Government has its OMB and GAO. There must always be some s.o.b. to remind
people with hobbies that there is no Santa Claus.

As an economist I am that s.o.b., that gadfly, as Socrates said, fastened upon the State. But in
defense of us s.o.b.'s please note that by hassling each profession individually, we are the best
friend of all professions collectively. For it surely must be self-evident that if we let everyone
run riot with the collective wealth there will soon be none for anyone.

Economists are not doing their job if they merely act like auditors and snoops. We are
actually more dangerous than that. We become aware that there are gross perceptual biases in
popular awareness of different kinds of waste. A poor congressman can get ruined for hiring a
steno with a fast track record, but quietly waste billions of the taxpayers' dollars on invisible
capital costs in the name of some worthy cause like conservation and no one lay a glove on him.
The economist's job is to put traceable dyes on the invisible costs to make them as visible as any
other. In this new age of limits wasting land and wasting capital are coming under heavier
scrutiny, and in wasting these resources the Forest Service has few peers.

Again, the Forest Service is not alone. If it were only the Forest Service that had developed
elaborate obfuscating ideologies to cover its tracks, we could stand back like H. L. Mencken and
laugh at the human comedy, but in fact the fallacies that are advanced to rationalize the waste of
capital and land in forestry have close cousins in other bureaucratic empires and in other
industries. The Forest Service may only be tying up $42 billion worth of the nation's resources as
Clawson estimates, but the kind of fallacious reasoning that is used when applied to many
industries cumulates up to a substantial share of the nation's limited treasure.

Just for one example of a parallel fallacy, the allowable cut effect (ACE) in forestry, which
seeks to obscure and obliterate the passage of time between investment in reforestation and
realization of mature timber, has its counterpart in the oil business in the idea that the cost of
replacing oil and gas is a current expense associated with the liquidation of old oil and gas so
long as you internalize the cash flow by reinvesting it within the same industry. Nonsense! says
the economist, but the Courts and the Internal Revenue Service seem to believe it, with the result
that an excess of capital is tied up in this industry, also.

No accepted fallacy is an island by itself but reinforces parallel fallacies in allied fields. This
is why economists cannot leave them alone wherever they find them.

3. Finally, the Forest Service itself is an especially challenging, vulnerable and tempting
target for reasons peculiar to itself.

a. Some of its doctrines are such transparent fallacies that they insult the intelligence. The
allowable cut effect is case #1. The worst insult you can level against a man in this modern age
seems to be that his virility might be deficient, but the second worst insult, believe it or not—and
I've actually experimented with this—is to suggest that he is culturally inferior or just plain
stupid. The reasoning behind ACE is so blatantly false that it says to us: "You're so dumb you'll
believe anything." This is the kind of red flag that Ron Ziegler waved when he said to the
American public, "That was the operative statement last week. It is now inoperative. The
operative statement this week is . . ." You can go too far and I think ACE will go down in history
as the Watergate of the Forest Service.

b. Some other questions raised by Forest Service doctrine are quite subtle and challenging,
and therefore interesting to those economists who fancy themselves to be sophisticated and
creative. One of these is the interesting business of showing that the culmination of mean annual
increment is a waste of capital because it is the same as maximizing discounted cash flow when
the rate of interest is equal to zero. In order to show this you first have to develop Faustmann's
formula for identifying discounted cash flow (in Forestry lingo we call that "soil expectation
value"). And then you have to bone up on your calculus and apply the footnote in the back of the
book that tells you about L'H6pital's rule.

Lest you and I be intimidated by all this esoteric talk, however, there is a commonsense
approach to the question. Culmination of mean annual increment is that rotation which
maximizes output per acre per year, without regard to the cost of any input. That must mean that
we are applying the other inputs, in this case capital, to the extreme that we would apply them if
they cost us nothing, which is to say if the interest rate were equal to zero.

c. Some Forest Service doctrines are enormously consequential in their implications for
macroeconomics. One of these is the fallacy that normalization eliminates inventory. You've
heard it propounded many times, I'm sure, that economics and mathematics may be all very well
when we're talking about a single-aged stand started from bare land but all that goes out the
window if we have a balanced forest such that when you cut a tree you plant a tree. Then, so the
argument goes, input and output become simultaneous. There is no lapse of time between them,
hence no need to worry about compound interest. This fallacy of the vanishing inventory must be
the grandfather of the allowable cut effect with which it has an obvious relationship. It is
something like saying that a bathtub becomes empty at the moment when the inflow equals the
outflow, or saying that you sawmill operators have no log decks when your flow of sales equals
your flow of purchases. It is a way of trying to eliminate from your perception the cost of
carrying inventory; a way of making the largest cost in forestry become invisible.

This doctrine is especially pernicious in its application to the national economy, where the-
macroeconomists in Washington and the universities have managed to overlook for a long time
that the rate of turnover of the nation's capital stock is a great and primary macroeconomic factor
determining the rate of cash flow into payrolls at the input end and flow of goods into saleable
form at the output end.

d. It is the conceit of economists that they are the guardians and protectors of correct analysis.
I hope we may be forgiven, therefore, if we feel aesthetically offended as well as culturally
degraded by the spectacle of a large, respected organization living by and propounding fallacious
doctrines. As teachers of young people, we hate to send them out into the world where they have
to learn to talk nonsense in order to move ahead professionally.

e. ACE is a fraud on the National Treasury in which we all have an interest. It is an obvious
ruse to pad the rate of return on government investments in order to appear to be conforming
with OMB demands that federal agencies show positive benefit-cost ratios on their investments,
without actually doing so.

In the world of Washington, D.C. fraud is simply fighting fire with fire, but that is no
justification in my opinion.

Thirty or 40 years ago, frauds of this kind were looked upon with great tolerance. The
philosophy of that time, if you remember that far back, was that what this country needs is more
investment opportunities. J. M. Keynes thought that was what made the world go around and he
sold his idea very effectively, or perhaps he just picked up an idea that was already selling itself.
In either case, people were in a mood to be fooled in this particular way for a long time and as a
result other people got into a set of bad habits. That was another age of limits, only then people
thought the limit on growth was consumer spending. Today people are getting more realistic, I
think, and realizing that the true limit on growth is resources. They are becoming increasingly
intolerant of people who waste resources.

In those old days, you could ask rhetorically, "If we did squeeze capital out of the Forest
Service whatever would we do with it anyway? We need investment opportunities, not more
capital looking for work, and standing timber is an investment outlet." Today the answer is
painfully obvious. We can use the capital to help finance new houses, which at this time the
market is telling us we need more than we need the last 10 or 20 percent of the existing
inventory of standing timber. How does the market tell us that? Because the timber is growing at
2 or 3 percent per annum at the same time that people are willing to pay 10 percent to finance a
house.

f. Finally, the Forest Service is a tempting target for young iconoclasts because it has been a
sacred cow for such a long, long time. The ideas of forest management that were generated in
19th century Germany and in the Depression in the United States are thoroughly obsolete today,
to the extent that they were based on conditions which have changed (rather than mathematical
logic which endureth forever). Thus, timberland which once was let go for taxes may now be
worth $100 or $200 per acre and timber which was worthless may now be worth $150 per
thousand board-feet. This calls for new standards of economy, but it takes a generation to turn
around a large organization. That is because large organizations are generally run by college
graduates with licenses—licenses to stop thinking, so it seems. We have learned to tolerate even
that, but the Forest Service is setting some kind of a new record of passing on old ideas to the
sons and the sons of sons even into the seventh generation, and it must be moving to the top of
anyone's list of hoary institutions encrusted with traditions which are vulnerable to attack by
spirited young bucks trying to make a reputation.

B. Some Major Faults of Forest Service Timber Management

1. The doctrine of culmination of mean annual increment. In the business world in general it
is widely recognized that the normative rule of investment is to maximize discounted cash flow.
The Forest Service chooses instead to maximize mean annual increment. These are incompatible
standards, except in the one case when the interest rate equals zero. This takes a little
mathematics but it can be shown that if the forest manager aims for that cutting cycle which will
maximize the expectation value at a given rate of interest, and if that interest rate falls to zero,
then what you get is maximum mean annual increment. This is another way of saying that this is
what you would do if cost were no object, that is, if only wood is good and all the resources used
to make wood have no other uses.

In other businesses when investments are judged in the way that ordinary men are judged—on
the basis of whether they can pay their way—the cost of carrying inventory has to be counted. If
the inventory is top-heavy you reduce it. In Forest Service accounting the inventory is ignored. It
disappears into a variety of mirrors. There is the fallacy of vanishing capital in a normalized
rotation, which I alluded to before. There is an assumption that the Service doesn't need to earn a
return on its equity capital. In propounding this fallacy, I blush to say, the Forest Service
receives aid and comfort from certain private firms which have been known to say the same
thing. Only yesterday I tore out of Fortune Magazine an ad by the Potlatch Forest Company.
Potlatch was beating its breast about its superior efficiency which they attributed to the low cost
of their lands and timber, resulting, from having purchased title a long time ago at low prices.
They were saying, in effect, "Don't judge us by the return we make on our equity at its modern
value; rather, judge us favorably today because of the shrewd purchase made by our
predecessors several decades ago." Private industry can hardly point the finger of scorn at the
Forest Service when it indulges in such nonsense itself. Let us hope this was purely P.R. and the
management doesn't really believe it.

Another device is to say that all earnings from the forests belong, to the Forest Service and
should be internalized. This rather forgets that these assets are owned by the taxpayers. Finally,
there is the device of debiting all costs to other accounts, accounts that are vague and allegedly
immeasurable such as watershed benefits, recreation benefits, wildlife benefits, and that great
limitless catchall, "the ecology." If we debit away all our costs in this way we can then say that
the carrying costs attributable to the timber inventory is very small.

2. Overdecentralization. This is the problem of spreading resources too thin so that instead of
applying them on the basis of productivity we rather end up with "a little of everything
everywhere" (in Marion Clawson's happy phrase for this unhappy condition). William Hyde has
documented the problem at length in his current research.

Overdecentralization of this kind means a great increase in the length of forest roads, and a
greater increase in cost because of the more difficult terrain at higher elevation with steeper
slopes. This means more trucking, with waste of scarce energy. It means more erosion, because it
is the forest roads more than the cutting of timber that cause erosion. It means greater invasion of
sensitive lands and wilderness areas. It means "forestry sprawl" quite comparable to the more
familiar urban sprawl, and with parallel inflation of costs and environmental invasion.

3. Delay before reforestation. Clawson tells us that the Forest Service spends less per acre on
forest management than private firms do. They are more likely to let cutover land lie bare, and
reforest itself. This doesn't sound like a good way to protect our watersheds, but let's think about
another aspect of it. In this age of limits on natural resources, and surplus labor, modern thinking
says it is time to use labor more to economize on land. Forest Service procedures are doing the
opposite. The resulting redwood trees might well be stamped "Made in California by Druids,"
while other Californians are drawing welfare checks.

Long cutting cycles have the effect of substituting capital for labor, because the longer the
tree stands and grows on itself, the more of its final value is added by capital rather than labor.
When the stand is established by labor, at least labor has the consolation that some of the capital
was produced by labor. When we let Druids establish the stand, it is land and not labor that
produces the initial capital.

Then there is delay after reforestation. Forest service cutting cycles are longer than almost
anyone else's. This used to seem efficient, back in the days when people thought labor the only
cost of production. But now we are recognizing that capital is costly too. In this age of limits, it
is obvious that we must economize on land, but capital is a resource, too. Capital is the sum of
all man-made resources, and high modern interest rates tell us that it is scarce. We need to use
what we have harder. In forestry, we use both land and capital harder by recycling them more
often, that is turning them over and combining them with labor more often. These are things the
Forest Service declines to do.

4. The Forest Service can justify almost any thinkable investment by ACE because obviously
if you can credit to any investment a harvest of mature timber which is arbitrarily tied to it, you
can credit it with many times its actual value.

By the same token, and crediting the Service with a certain peculiar consistency in its fallacy,
I surmise that the true value of mature timber is understated because the cost of new investments
to which it is credited must, in turn, be debited from it. This would serve to rationalize tying up
mature timber longer than otherwise. These seemingly opposite results have one thing in
common which is desirable from the point of view of agency self-aggrandizement and that is
they both tend to internalize more capital within the agency's control.

But there is nothing here to cause good allocation of capital within the agency. Sub-economic
investments can be justified only in those areas or jurisdictions where they can be tied to the
harvest of mature timber. I do not claim to have studied this in detail, but when any agency goes
around putting its money on a doctrine as absurd as ACE we are justified in suspecting the worst.
You don't have to eat the whole omelet to know that one of the eggs is bad.

5. Noncommunication. Communiqués tend to come out in Federalese which is, as you know,
a highly evolved system of noncommunication. When it is intermixed with intimidating inside
lingo from old school days at Yale or Syracuse, it is even worse. I will spare you examples for I
am sure you can all supply many of these.

6. Losing money for the government. The British Columbia Forest Service, which is certainly
one of the most moribund institutions with which I have ever come in contact, at least returns a
surplus to the provincial treasury each year. The U.S. Forest Service, presiding over much more
land in a much more favorable climate, cannot claim as much. Marion Clawson has done a nice
job of totting up the accounts. As of 1974, cash receipts of $486 million dollars including income
from mineral leases and forage were just offset by cash outlays of the same amount. This did not
include an additional $80 million dollars of payments to States and Counties which left a deficit
of $80 million dollars on current account.

But then Clawson does what should be done to every firm, that is, he slaps on an imaginary
mortgage of $42 billion dollars representing the estimated value of the land and timber presided
over by the Service. He charges interest at 5% which is an annual cost or charge against the
enterprise of $2 billion 100 million dollars.

You may object that he counted in nothing for the annual growth of value caused by inflation
or rising prices. In answer to this, however, note that he used a modestly low interest rate of 5%.
Who among you can borrow at 5%? This was his allowance for inflation.

He did not overlook values other than timber. He puts a value on water regulation at $50
million dollars, and we must remember that he spent many years as a student of water resources.
He puts a value on recreation visits at $440 million dollars, and we must remember that he is a
leading authority on the economics of outdoor recreation. Even these values do not make much
of a dent in that annual interest charge of $2.1 billion dollars. This figure towers above all the
others and serves as a constant reminder that the Forest Service is not earning any return of
consequence on the colossal investment of public values placed at its disposal.

In keeping with a modern fashion, Clawson's rendering of the Forest Service accounts lets in
the sunshine in a particularly revealing way. This kind of sunshine should spell sunset for the
Forest Service practice of carrying excess inventories of timber and land.

C. Reform for Greater Social Benefits.
1. What are social benefits?

a. Responding to the signals of the market. We sometimes get a guilty feeling that "social"
benefits mean following some guide other than our self-interest. Sometimes, no doubt, that is
true. But, what could be more socially beneficial than producing what is demanded on the output
side? What could be more socially justified than sparing what is expensive on the input side?
These are things that people do automatically when following their own self-interest. Adam
Smith is not dead—he is alive and well in the universities. The Forest Service would come more
alive and do better if it paid more heed to Adam Smith, and his sylvan, Teutonic counterpart
Martin Faustmann. As Duke University forester Roy Thompson showed years ago in his
fascinating history of forestry doctrines, Faustmann like Smith was an enemy of mercantilism
and regarded economic forest management as an anti-mercantilist reform comparable to Adam
Smith's view of free international trade.

b. Social benefits are accomplished by doing what landowners do when they are under
pressure. Private land, forested or otherwise, is held subject to property taxation. Why? The
rationale for property taxation is that the tax compensates those who are excluded from owning
real estate for the benefits enjoyed by others who do. The tax puts pressure on owners to provide
social benefits. First, it makes them finance government. Second, in order to raise money they
have to render service by utilizing the land to yield products for others to consume. And, third, in
order to do these things they have to provide employment to others. Thus, the property tax makes
privately-held land be used in much wider public interest.

The national forests, which are actually owned by the public, should then provide even
greater social benefits. However, we see in fact that far from yielding government revenues, the
Forest Service absorbs them. Far from yielding maximum service, the Forest Service holds back
timber supplies. Far from providing employment, the Forest Service manages land in such a way
as to minimize it. It only provides employment for sleepy capital, capital that might better be
used elsewhere.

c. Releasing capital and absorbing people. In this age of scarce capital and surplus labor, the
social benefit is clearly to spare the one and utilize the other. Forest Service policy is
programmed backwards, that is, to waste capital and save people. A monument may be defined
as anything which is built with one eye on eternity. Extravagant monumental dams on the Soviet
model are now widely recognized to be wasteful investments of this kind. Sierra Clubbers and
economists agree on this at least. When will Sierra Clubbers recognize that over-mature timber is
another such monument and an extravagant waste of scarce resources which is perversely
worshipped by otherwise thrifty and Spartan outdoors persons?

2. What should the Forest Service do?

a. The Forest Service should act as though it were saddled with a $42 billion dollar mortgage.
It should pay $2, $3, or $4 billion dollars interest to the Treasury each year until such time as it
shall have sold off its excess inventory of timber and land. Excess in this case means timber and
land above that on which an income may be earned. Congress, no doubt, would have to act to
permit such sales, so this is not clearly a Forest Service responsibility. But who, we may ask,
tells Congress what to do? Where does Congress turn for expert advice on forestry questions?
What advice does it get when some Treasury watchdog inquires what the Forest Service is doing
with the golden talents with which it has been entrusted? If these sound like rhetorical questions,
they are.

b. The Forest Service needs to substantiate and quantify its claims that it generates enormous
values other than those measured in timber sales. What is its esthetic contribution to our
environment, for example? I have lived surrounded by national forests, and I have also lived in
Vermont and Wisconsin. Both of these latter states were logged over by rapacious private
owners. Both of them today, and especially Vermont, are environmentally popular and pleasing.
I especially enjoy Vermont where many small farmers live with their own woodlots which they
cut into whenever they darn well please, which is, you may be sure, a lot earlier than the
culmination of mean annual increment. Here you have a total, a fertile and a delightful society
which is praised by almost all who get to know it. Can the National Forests by banning small
private landowners produce an environment anywhere near as pleasing? I have yet to see it.

The Forest Service should substantiate and quantify its claims about the value of its
management practices to watershed protection. The fact that this has not been done does make
you wonder. Trees do transpire. Is it possible that they are wasting our water supply just as they
waste our capital supply? Many of my new neighbors in Southern California think so and have
been complaining for years that Forest Service watershed management practices do anything but
maximize runoff or regulate it optimally.

d. The Forest Service should allocate its funds in accordance with productivity. This would
mean in practice practicing more "highsite" forestry. "Highsite" is a confusing term since high
sites tend to be found at low elevations, so let us avoid confusion by saying the Service should
practice GOOD-site forestry. This major need is pointed out in William Hyde's recent analyses at
Resources for the Future. Orthodox forestry says to invest everywhere without much
discrimination among sites with the result that we have a little bit of everything everywhere.
Economics says concentrate your limited forces where they are most effective and your limited
capital where it is most productive. We should use our best land the way Mayor Daley used to
tell his troops to vote, that is "early and often."

R. W. Behan has written recently that good forestry today means economizing on capital
instead of on land. I cannot agree, although the spirit of Mr. Behan's remarks seems right on
target. Good forestry economics means economizing on both land and capital at once. We
economize on land by using the good sites hard and recycling them fast, while letting the low
quality sites pretty much alone. John Walker has demonstrated in a most impressive way that
when we go to shorter cutting cycles we can justify considerably enhanced investment in forest
management on the good sites because the return is to be realized so much quicker. He has
shown that if we do this we can get our timber supply from the better sites without needing to
invade the poorer ones at all. This is clearly the direction in which Forest Service policy needs to
move. The Forest Service needs to relinquish the fringes of its enormous territorial empire to
others who will utilize them for purposes other than wood production. This will permit it to
focus its energies on the better sites, producing an equal or greater supply from a much lesser
base of land and capital.

To accomplish this it clearly needs direction and help from Congress and the Administration.
These, in turn, have been known to listen to the industry on a number of important matters. Now
the industry is gearing up perhaps for the first time to give well-reasoned, rational, constructive
advice. The work of John Walker at Simpson Timber Company is outstanding and the Western
Timber Association is completely tuned in on this and ready to carry the message.

Congress today, no doubt, presents the Forest Service as it presents all bureaucrats with a
perverse set of incentives. Where is the incentive to the Forest Service or any other Federal
agency to release excess land? It is up to Congress to give such direction. We cannot realistically
expect Forest Service people to give such advice. They are only human and are reacting
10

predictably to the perverse incentives with which they are presented, as the poet said, in a world
they never made. But then the world was never much improved by people who merely react
predictably to the incentives imposed on them by others. We might reasonably look forward to
some self-educated and inner-directed people within the Forest Service pushing in a new
direction. We may definitely look forward to the Western Timber Association and other industry
groups pressing on Congress from the other side. The net result I optimistically think will
someday be a surprising turnover in Forest Service policy. Stranger things have happened before
and will again.
