                                                         Lj_/
               OIL MD GAS: THE UNFINISHED TAX REFORM*


                           Mason Cat fney



Introduction

    In the heady early 'los, many of us sensed that tax reform was

finally on its way. The sleepy public had awakened to its true


interests. One of the few solid results of that climacteric was


victory over the depletion allowance. For years this had been the


quintessential loophole, the symbol and a citadel of special privi—

lege: it was preferential; the benefitting industry contains the


largest industrial corporations;the industry is our major polluter,


directly and indirectly; oil income includes a high share of un-


earned rents; and the use of industry wealth in politics was feared


as a corrupting force. Accordingly, the repeal of depletion in


1975 was hailed with relief and satisfaction at a job well done, a


triumph for equity, efficiency, and righteousness.
                              —2—

    But alas, we keep seeing disturbing news. Occidental Petroleum


Company is selling its surplus tax credits to Harsh and McLennan


Companies. "Although Oxy is highly profitable, it has little U.S.


tax liability because of other tax breaks." The twenty—six


largest energy firms paid an average U.S. income tax rate of 12.4Z


in 1979, according to DOE's Financial Reporting System, (a source


now targeted for extinction).2 That suggests unfinished business


of a gross order.   While we may not know all the specific devices


by which the industry achieves these results, the results themselves


would seem to represent for the tax avoiders the substance of


things hoped for and, for inquiring citizens, the evidence of


things unseen.


     There is also a federal gas tax, of- course. At 4t/ gallon


it raises about $4.4B/year.3 But the proceeds are earmarked for


highways, making this a user charge rather than a tax, and one that


falls far short of paying for the roadways required to use gas,

especially the city streets where most gas is burned.


     One might regard WPT as an equipoise, at least since passage


in 1979 and imposition for part of 1980, and until it shall have
                                3


been eroded by exemptions and retired on or before schedule, as


now seems likely. (Its apparent impact is already halved by


deductibility.) Or one might regard it as a separable issue, a


tax with its own rationale based on an extraordinary price increase


in which some industry elements were complicit, a price for deregu-


lation, and a sort of "benefit assessment" to recoup some of the


high military costs of supporting oil interests abroad.


     Either way, there is a case for reforming the income tax


treatment of oil. From the first viewpoint it is to replace WET


with the structurally superior income tax. Few economists support


the structure of WET, which is too much like an excise based on


gross. From the second viewpoint, WPT is irrelevant, and the


income tax should be made self—contained and neutral. In either


case, income tax will be here long after WET shall have withered


away, and we should begin now to set it right, for it will take


many years. And almost all hands agree that U.S. taxes on oil are


below world levels, even including WET and overlooking loopholes.4


     As to industry size and power, the products of retained


earnings, these continue to grow impressively. While others at the
                                —4-.

top of Fortune's 500 falter and stumble, more and mote oil firms


work their way to the top ten, seven of which are now in oil and


gas. Petroleum industry investment now accounts for 20% of all


nonresidential construction.5 Eighty—three thousand oil and gas


wells are being drilled in the U.S. in 1981.6 The incremental


revenue stream from new U.S. petro—energy is forecast at $250 B/year


by 1990. Twenty major firms report having 188 million acres


(sic!) under lease—that is 5.2 States of Illinois—of which only


15% is developed. These firms are currently acquiring new leases


rapidly, up 35% from 1916 to 1980.8 This move is reminiscent of


the gas station land rush of the sixties, when some 40% (sic) of


all the retail land use in a typical American city (Milwaukee) was


in gas stations and their aprons, mostlyheld by majors.9


     Failure to tax   fairly an industry so huge and dominating is

of more than symbolic meaning. The absolute dimensions are stag-


gering. In addition, the value—added by the industry is much less


the product of labor and much more the product of accumulated


wealth than is the norm. Net worth per employee for Standard Oil


of California was reported at $234,300 in 1979, 46 times higher
                               —5—

than Singer Sewing Machine at $5,100, a labor—intensive firm.1°


Preferential treatment f or this industry is a form of preferential


treatment for property income vs. labor income, and for large


firms vs. small.


     For all those reasons, tax reform is unfinished business of


high priority. While a hardened partisan might assume the subject


was dead during this Administration, imperatives of fact and


circumstance generally bear alike on all r&gimes. There is a huge


deficit to meet. There is a recognized overload on payroll taxes,


limiting recourse to this well. There is a readiness to trade gas


price deregulation for higher taxes. There is the threat of rapid


expansion by states into the vacuum of unpreempted revenues left


by federal dereliction. And there is widespread intellectual


recognition that low—cost oil is high—rent oil, and high rent means


high taxable capacity. The last point is hardly new, being central


to the doctrines of François Quesnay and his followers (including


Adam Smith) over two centuries ago. But it has had its ups and


downs since then, and only recently scaped from traps laid by neo-


classical economists and re—emerged in the ascendant, particularly
                              —6—

with respect to oil and gas. These are enough reasons to get


                                 t -egi y inspacting_tha

tax preferences enjoyed by oil and gas.


         Some of the remaining loopholes are widely known and


frequently recited; some are seen only through a mist; and some


are invisible, although gross, camouflaged as the natural order of


things. I will itemize all, but expand only on the more neglected


points. The invisible loopholes are not that by virtue of being


tiny or uninteresting.



     A. Twice—told Tales: a standard list of tax preferences for

         oil and gas.




         1. Expensing Intangibles


     The "intangible't costs of drilling and equipping a productive


well are expensible. Tax economists now generally recognize expens-


ing of investments in durable capital as being tantamount to 100Z


exemption of the income imputable to the capital, except for small,


undiversified firms that bunch up unusable expenses in some years


when other income is low. Some other industries, notably agricul—


tine, enjoy similar privileges, but the standard of comparison, I
                              —7—

submit, should be the wage—worker with his W—2 Form, the median


American who bears the full sting of the nominal tax rates and for


whose presumed benefit we have a "progressive" income tax structure.


     One advantage of expensing intangibles was partly abated in


1975 when these outlays were made subject to recapture when lease—


holds are sold for a gain.1 Recapture of a fixed number of


dollars still leaves a substantial advantage, because interest and


inflation are unaccounted for. Note that other expensed items


like dry holes are not recaptured; nor are intangibles recaptured


if there is no sale.



         2. Dry Holes


     If a well is dry, one expenses it. Of course had it produced


one would have expensed most of it anyway, as intangible. What is


added here is expensing of the rest of it, the tangible part; and


exemption from future recapture, to which "intangibles" have become


vulnerable since 1975.12


     Dry holes on dry leases would be deducted anyway upon abandon-


ment. Dry holes on producing leases are the issue here. A field
                                —8—

is developed by "stepping out" until the pay area is defined by a


ring of dry holes,. which area noaL part of thproducLng                a

       The general issue is a denial of the capital nature of all


outlays that do not result directly in production: outlays like


exploration, research, and lease acquisition. A reasonable man


would construe dry holes as part of the capital sunk in the pro-


ducers finally located by the total process. McDonald notes,


   •   • unsuccessful exploration costs are an inevitable part of

the total costs of acquiring productive assets •   . ." and holds

they should be capitalized.13 Industry spokesmen make this same


point when justifying high returns on gushers when taken out of


context. What they leave out is that the outlays should be capit-


alized, not expensed £ or tax accounting.



           3. Royalties Treated as Foreign Tax Credits


       In the beginning was the word, and the word was "royalty,"


meaning payments made to lessors per unit of production. And the


word was made "tax" by several foreign governments who were lessors.


The acceptance of this transubstantiation by the IRS generates
                                 —9—

huge factitious tax credits for multinational oil corporations.


These are used to offset taxes on domestic income, dollar for


dollar.




           4. Profit Shifting by Controlling Transfer Pricing


     Vertically integrated firms, often with many subsidiaries,


have substantial latitude to shift profits to lower—tax jurisdic-


tions by adjusting transfer prices on goods moved between tax


jurisdiction. Tax authorities wage constant battle on this front


but, in the nature of the case, often lose, compromise, or give


up.'4



        B. Through a glass backwards: matters seen but miniaturized



            1. Residual Percentage Depletion


        There are "a few minor exceptions" to the repeal of percentage


depletion. It is not clear that they are so minor, or that persis-


tent shelter—seekers cannot widen them to a major exception.


        Lessors or royalty—owners are the most glaring exemption.


Royalties qualify for percentage depletion at 22Z. Royalties
                                — 10 —


today are no longer the modest 1/8 of yore: 25% off the top is

more   typicalJ That is based on gross well-head value, a value
added to by the lessees' wells which are normally much deeper and

costlier than before, and which the lessee writes off as well. Of


all the incomes in the business, lessors' royalties are the purest


windfall of rent, representing no functional effort of any kind,


but only prior ownership. The royalty owner bears no costs of


finding or production. There is normally no opportunity cost or


foregone gain in the usual sense, because traditional surface


uses continue unvexed by oil operations. It is hard to imagine


any useful economic function, any increase of supply, any employment—


creating investment, or any measure of equity that is enhanced by


this allowance.                           -




       A second exception of note is the "small producer", who gets


percentage depletion on the first 1,000 bbl/d of oil and the first


6,000 MCF/d of gas. To qualify for this, one most not refine or


retail downstean. The effect is to protect the "medium—size inde-


pendent drillers."6
                              — 11


    The value of the exemption is not negligible. One thousand


bbl/d at $30 is $30,000/d or $11 million per year. Six thousand


MCF/d at $5 is the same again, for a total of $22 million per year.


If wells are shut in for part of the year there is no loss: the


daily average is allowed, i.e. 365,000 bbls/year.


     In addition, there are interesting possibilities for multiply-


ing this by dividing a property among several owners, using the


partnership vehicle. The exemption goes with persons, not proper-


ties, so nine partners means nine exemptions. The cap on percentage


depletion for each partner is 65% of taxable income. The tax


shelter for limited partners with outside income is evident.


         The tax code is, of course, complex and filled with traps


for the unwary, but also with plums for the crafty. Public infor-


mation from the IRS on these points17 is even more opaque and


evasive than the norm. This kind of bureaucratic stonewalling


invites one to surmise the worst. What is accomplished by insiders


and specialists with private rulings and "various special rules"


alluded to but not specified by IRS'8 is impossible to ascertain


fully without being heavily involved personally, by which process,
                              — 12 —


however, one is coopted and silenced. What is certain is that

there is a large tax shelter industry in oil partnerships. Besides


stretching the loopholes, this industry consumes a portion of the


gains to support its own efforts, which are, from a national view-


point, a waste of talents.


     A third exception is for "stripper" wells, producing 10 bId


(barrels per day) or less. Here the effective cap is on a per


well basis, not per person. But wells may be grouped on a property,


and some producing over 10 bId offset by others producing less.


The denominator of the mean is also inflatable by including water


injection wells,'9 and perhaps by other stratagems. Wells producing


15 or 20 bId will, of course, be slowed down to qualify, as needed.


     A fourth exception is for regulated sellers of gas with old


contracts predating February 1975. In the circumstances there is


equity in this, as these sellers are being taxed by regulation.


There is also efficiency, at the production end, in offsetting the


disincentive effect of lower prices on older producers. On the


consumption side, however, this provision merely reinforces the


anti—conservation bias inherent in the price ceiling. It passes
                              — 13 —


the depletion allowance through to consumers. It increases the

supply of old gas at old prices, which utilities "roll in" to


lower the average cost on which customers' rates are based, It


increases the spread between the low customer rates and the extra-


ordinarily high prices paid for new field gas today. Tracing


through the whole system, then, the end result is a highly lever-


aged rise in the demand for new gas, a transfer of wealth to the


majors who hold those 188 million acres, and other speculators who


have spent the last decade laying lease to lease and deal to deal


in gas—prone areas.



         2. Capital Gains


     Profit realized upon sale of leasehold enjoys capital gains


status, with all that implies. In some ways this is no more prefer-


ential than the treatment of other real estate; in one way less


so; but in many ways more so. We take those in order.


     Capital gains treatment in general is highly preferential,


and lacking in any deep rationale. It has no support among tax


economists, most of whom subscribe to the flaig—Simons doctrine
                              — 14 —


that gains are income, and should ideally be recognized as they

accrue. It has no Congressional

preference has never received a systematic exposition in any official.

source." It is something they just want to do, not to explain.


"The absence of a clearly articulated set of policy objectives


has been criticized by many. • .Unsure of its own goals, Congress


has provided no more than a sketch. •   . of what it wants. The
courts and the IRS have done the rest.20


     It has no Constitutional basis:    "Congress is free to treat

gains and losses as 'realized' pretty much whenever it chooses."21

The usual rationales are based on shallow and incidental procedural

and administrative matters; or on incentive arguments that have no

application to land values, the major values whose nature it is to


appreciate routinely over an extended period of ownership, and


qualify for capital gain.


     With any real property, carrying costs (interest and property


taxes) are recognized as they are expensed, while the gain is not


recognized until sale, if ever. The expenses are deductible in


full from ordinary income, thus being weighted two and a half
                                  — 15 —


times heavier than the gain they produce, the gain being only 40%


recognized. The sales price becomes a new basis, so the process


is repeatable. The owner can convert his gain to cash tax free,


by borçowing on it. Cash flow from the mortgaged property can


cover the interest, freeing the borrowed cash for new ventures,


with new untaxed gains, and so ad infinitum. There is also step—up


of basis at death; deferral of tax on sale, by various routes;


tax—deferred barter; and a host of related benefits that are part


of "capital gains treatment," which is tender and solicitous in


the extreme22 compared to the harsh and relentless imposition on


tiordinaryti   income from working persons and working capital.


     A very common way to avoid taxes, one whose significance has


escaped scholarly notice, is simply to buy land in advance of


one's own needs. After a few years, one has a valuable perpetual


asset for use, bought cheap, with never a tax on the increase of


wealth, and no prospect of one.


      It is as to the last point that oil leases are less preferred


than other land, because the corpus of the enhanced oil value does
                               — 16 —


become taxable income when sold in units of production, and cost


depletion   is limi dto historical cost. 6i will see, however,
that this handicap can be overcome by timely sales, establishing a

new high basis for cost depletion by buyers.)

     In many ways oil leases enjoy more tax preference than other

land. First, much of the de facto cost of leasehold acquisition

is expensed: most of exploration, all dry holes, and all abandoned

leases. Each of these is treated separately later.


     Second, delay rentals are expensed. There is no counterpart


to this in ordinary land acquisition. Rentals are expensed before


there is any income, and even in the absence of taxable income.

     Third, most of lease development costs are expensed, because

"intangible,"23 or because they are dry holes. Thus, the asset

value that becomes a capital gain is built up by an accretion of


fully deductible expenses.

     Now discovering and developing pay zones in oil rock are the


ordinary businesses of oil firms, not incidentals. The pay zones


are their inventory; they are dealers. In the leading Corn Products


case,24 it was settled that "Since      1221 is an exception
                              — 17 —


from the normal tax requirements of the Internal Revenue Code, the


definition of a capital asset must be narrowly applied.    •u' and


it generally is. Stephen McDonald has noted that,


           • .oil and gas deposits would seem to
        fall in this category. .   (of assets that
        in the ordinary course of business are
        regularly offered for sale to customers)".26


To be declared a "dealer" in other real estate is to lose capital


gain privileges. Oil firms do not have this problem. Only timber


has achieved a comparable preference, with breeding herds coming


in a distant third.                                -




     Security analysts and accountants have become concerned about

the distorted picture of oil finns that has developed because they


do not report inventory increases, as other firms do. There is


no entry on the balance sheet of oil firms for oil reserves.


Capitalized investment is merely symbolic, and independent reserve


estimates are needed to find net worth. 21 Accordingly, the FASB


and the SEC have finally required Reserve Recognition Accounting


(RRA) for 1980 reports. Here, revenue is recognized at the time


reserves are determined, as opposed to sold.     Nineteen—eighty
                              — 18 —


reports contain a wealth of new data on the weight of this factor,

which could basically change the way we look at oil firms in the


age of OPEC.


     Here is Cetty Oil Company as a sample. The increase in proved


reserves in 1980 was $3.33, or 3.18 times the Net Income otherwise


reported. In 1979, the increase was $6.33, or 10.43 times the Net


Income otherwise reported.28 The value of proved reserves at


12/31/80 was $17.23, or 2.07 times the Total Assets of all kinds


reported conventionally.29


     The reported reserves are net of royalties. Royalty owners


bear no costs, so a 25% royalty could represent 50% or over 100%


of net income. So for every dollar of added reserves reported by


Cetty, the lessee, there is a good fraction of a dollar not reported,


enjoyed by a royalty owner.


     The increases were the joint results of findings, acquisi-


tions, and price hikes; and the greatest of these was price hikes,


according to Cetty. One could argue the details of SEC reporting


rules, particularly the assumption of constant future prices, a
                                — 19 —


myth somewhat offset by a low lOt discount rate. But Getty is

careful to note that these estimates "should not be construed as


implying in any way a price at which Cetty would sell the assets."3°


A billion up, a billion down, who knowsi—but it is clear that


reserve increments represent big, big money,and a major part of


the real income of oil firms.


     Another authority which is challenging the traditional invisi-


bility of reserve appreciation is the California State Board of


Equalization. Proposition 13 takes a recognition—upon—sale posture


towards land values, for purposes of property tax assessment. But


new construction enters the roles at current market. The Board's


Rule 468 treats new findings as "new construction" and also adds


the increase of economic reserves resulting from higher price.3'


There will be no public outcry, since exemption for oil was a


totally unintended by—product of Proposition 13, the "homeowners'


revolt."


     The shadow of Eisner v. Macouiber32 hangs over any discussion


of recognizing income before sale. But the application of this
                                 — 20 —


case depends on whether reserves are a "capital asset" or an inven-


tory.     If the latter, then other rules apply, and increased


inventory in other industries is routinely added to taxable income.


If this be, as I submit, the appropriate stance, then the present


treatment is a gross loophole indeed. In the Bruun case33 the


court held that income in kind is income, even though real estate.


Just as Congress repealed Bruun by adding § 109, so it could


legislate that income in kind is realized upon discovery. if that


seems a shocking idea, this suggests how conditioned and mind—bound


we are by custom, for anything less is preferential.


        Another advantage that oil enjoys over other land is that a


new buyer can deduct his cost from ordinary income, as cost deple-


tion; and he can begin right away, on a unit—of—production basis.


With other land, of course, a new basis is only deductible upon


resale; and thus from a capital gain, and after a (normally) long


period of ownership.


        Inflating the price of oil leases upon resale converts


ordinary income to capital gain: the buyer's ordinary income will
                                — 21 —


be reduced by the seller's capital gain. There have been occasional


press reports of "abuses",34 but it is the basic concept that is


abusive, and we would have a poor opinion of our tax shelter


industry not to assume that the possibilities are heavily exploited


by brilliant minds that might otherwise be usefully employed.


     A last advantage that   oil leases enjoy over other land is

that they can be written off at all. Other land is not depreciable


(except illicitly by allocating part of it to a depreciable building


on it). Of course, the tax depletion of oil has a rationale, the


land is consumed physically; thus it differs from other land. But


that is only half the story. The other half is that oil pay zones


are naturally limited and scarce: thus they resemble other land,


and thus they appreciate in real terms over time and generate


value increments routinely and massively, and in times like the


'70s, sensationally. The exhaustion of old reserves makes it all


the more certain that untapped ones will appreciate. Capital gain


privileges to other "unearned increments" are in some small way


compensated by non—depreciability. Privileges to oil suffer no


such penalty.
                                           — 22


      Oil firms are well positioned to use the capital gains priv-


ileges because they have become vertically disintegrated at the


front end: exploring has to a high degree been separated from


production. Only a small share of the funds spent looking for


oil and gas is spent by majors. tttndependentsll are said 1o account


for 88% of well completions now.35 Drilling partnerships offered

$2 billion publicly in 1981, and an estimated $6 billion pri-

vately.36 Subsidiaries and subcontractors are also involved, in


fairly complicated ways. Thus) Marathon Oil, itself being swallowed


by U.S. Steel, is "farming out" three blocks of raw acreage in the


Celtic Sea to a group led by Texas Gas, which will acquire a half—


interest in any block drilled.37


      Large fins, in turn, acquire proved properties. Getty, for


example,    spent 58% of its 1980 acquisitions budget on proved proper-

ties, and more than 73% of its 1979 budget.38 They spent more on


acquisitions than on either exploration or development, with


acquisition rising at a much faster pace, 1978—8O. This is


not to say they do not also acquire unproved leases, for we have
                              — 23 —


noted a vast acreage increase, too. But there seems to be a regular


"churning" of appreciated leaseholds, creating gains for sellers


and new high bases for buyers.40


     There are more gains to expect ahead. Decontrol of natural


gas is probably coming; the nuclear alternative is nearly dead;


the WPT is programmed to selfdestruct in a few years; and all


three branches now in Washington are more pro—oil than in a long


time. Royalty owners and strippers have already been relieved


of WPT, and WPT on new oil reduced.4' New A4ic oil is now totally


exempt.42 Twenty major oil firms with 188 million acres under


lease43 are well set to gain from all this. Fifty lesser firms


and a few thousand individuals, families, trusts, part'hips


estates, institutions, local governments, and so on doubtless swell


that acreage figure much If we had the data. We never will, but


it is clear that capital gains for oil is a large matter. Long


lost in the shadow of percentage depletion, it should now be


spotlighted. As Stephen McDonald predicted in 1963, elIminating


percentage depletion would have little effect on oil incomes unless
                              — 24 —


capital gains, which is "a close substitute for percentage deple-

tion," were modified too.44



         3. Interest


     Interest is always expensed, even though borrowed funds go to


acquire "capital" assets like leaseholds whose gains are mainly


tax—exempt when they appreciate. While this is a general loophole


for all landowners, it is of greater consequence in oil because


the nature of the major assets is to appreciate in situ as old


oil is exhausted. The preference involved in deducting interest


is compounded because borrowing on appreciated leasehoidsis a way


of realizing gains in cash without recognizing any taxable income.


In contrast, pity the poor working girl. She reports and pays


current income taxes on a big chunk of supposed income which she


hasn't received because it was withheld for FleA. Some other


pension withholdings have the same effect. But pension rights are


not bankable, as appreciated leaseholds are. So the worker gets a


tax without cash; the oil finn gets cash without any tax.


     Borrowed funds are also used to explore and develop leaseholds.


The proved developed property, increased in value, may then be
                              — 25 —


sold as capital gain, with the interest expensed (along with most

of the principal).



     C. Invisible Loopholes


     Several loopholes go virtually unrecognized, even in the


reform literature. Yet they are in plain sight. It is rather a


trick of intellectual camouflage. They blend in with a background


of assumptions tailored to the attitudes of a dominant group, and


so escape notice. Even the beneficiaries are likely unaware of


them, but regard them as the natural order of things. They may be


exposed not so much by sleuthing as simply by taking thought.



         1. Leasehold Abandonment


     In the nature of exploration, severil leases are taken for


each that proves productive. It is a screening process. Something


like fourth—fifths are culled out and then abandoned. A reasonable


person would construe the cost of the four culls as part of the


cost of acquiring the one producer, and this is the industry posi-


tion when explaining the high returns on the producing leases. At


Prudhoc Bay the lucky winners got some $50 Billions worth of oil
                                 — 26 —


on leases costing only $6 Millions,45 and reams have been written


justifying this by the costs of acquiring and sifting through


other leaseholds, which were abandoned.


     Now if the cost of abandoned leaseholds is part of the real


cost of acquiring producing ones, then it should be treated the


same, tax—wise. But instead, abandonments are expensed. The only


outlay capitalized is that for the specific lease that produces.


Thus, some BOZ of the de facto cost of land acquisition is expensed


at an early date. Disappointing leaseholds are abandoned regularly,


as in Baltimore Canyon recently, with "tax reasons" given as the


motive •46



     On top of the benefits for lessees,lessors also gain from


abandonments. There is a formula for diluting a lessor's cost


basis by the amount of expected royalties, and abandonment reduces


the diluting factor to zero.47     A lessor who gets bonuses on


five tracts to get one producer can deduct BOX of his cost (on the


four abandonments) however large the royalties expected on the


producer.
                              — 27 —


    Few other businesses have this avoidance avenue open to them


on such a scale because abandonment of land is not routine in


other businesses. A comparable privilege is enjoyed by orchardists


who write off their early thinnings as abandonments and thus take


of f three—fourths of the capital cost before a grove is even


mature.48 One writes off the abandoned trees pro rata, but as


the others grow into the space thus opened, no offsetting apprecia-


tion is recognized. But on the whole, this ranks as an extraordinary


privilege, open to few.


     Abandonment is much better than a capital loss. It is an


ordinary loss deduction, even though the producing leases are


"capital" assets when sold. The basis for abandonment loss is


leasehold cost, plus any unrecovered capital allocated to the


lease.49 Most of this unrecovered capital is exploration cost


allocated to the lease, for exploration must be capitalized until


lease surrender. One may also pick up a good deal of miscellany


not otherwise expensed, like allocated overhead. And there is no


limit. There is no requirement to offset losses first against
                                              — 28 —


____ --   -
              cittgas- thgross amsnt-4&-an-ordina                   Therais_________

              $3,000 limit, as under § 1211 for net capital losses, mete


              is no recapture, as with § 1231 assets.5° As to timing, one


              can regulate this entirely for tax advantage because no sale is


              involved.


                   Putting it all together, the package of benefits is extra-


              ordinary: capital gains for winners, ordinary loss deduction for


              losers, no limits, no pooling, no recapture, no constraints on


              timing. to be sure, § 1231 assets enjoy a small taste of the


              same advantage: they, too, get capital gains when they rise, and


              unlimited ordinary loss deduction. But the restrictions are much


              tighter. The class of assets excludes inventories held for sale


              to customers (oil deposits are certainly that). Gain and loss are


              recognized on a net basis only, not a gross basis. The net basis


              means that to take an ordinary loss, you must first report all


              your gains as ordinary income——quite a difference. And excess


              depreciation is recaptured.5'
                              — 29 —


    My LeTfundahwentaflyçthrabantonmenr ttiosscrner at thtfront



end: it is really part of the cost of acquiring assets, rather


than a loss on selling them. The comparable provision in other


businesses would be to allow expensing 80% of capital and land


costs. No one else makes out so well. The reform literature


neglects abandonments entirely, so far as I know. It is a gross


oversight, especially now that lease acquisition has become the


largest single outlay of oil firms.


     The relative weight of lease purchase in oil industry costs


may be judged by these data from the Joint Association Survey,


(Table 1). By 1974, lease acquisition had jumped to 38% of the


total spending of the industry. And what about now? In 1981, one


single lease sale (Santa Maria Basin) brought $2.27B in winning


bids on 81 tracts. In 1980, a Gulf of Mexico sale brought $2.6B.53


These two sales are a small fraction of total acquisitions cur-


rently, but together add up to 86% as much as 364 reporting firms


spent in 1974. The treatment of leasehold payments is the weigh-


tiest question in oil tax law, in dollar values.
                                       — 30 —




         TABLE 1. Domestic Expenditures by 364 Reporting

                       Oil and Gas Firms.52




       Date:                       1970              1974         Increase

Kind   of Outlay                                 9          Z     9       Z


Exploratory Wells               .815 12.7        1.641 11.0        .832 102

Acquiring
Undeveloped Acreage             .114 11.1        5.659 38.0       4.945 693

Geological.
  & Geophysical                 .349     5.4      .640      4.3    .291       83

Development Wells              1.733 26.9        2.686 18.0        .953       55

Lease Equipment                 .443     6.7      .770      5.2    .327       74

Production
  & Overhead                   2.379 37.0        3.508 23.5       1.129       47


               TOTAL           6.433 99.8       14.910 100.0      8.477 132
                              — 31 —


         2.   Scouting


                                         i*ieed 5rEóIl

so. Technically the cost is capitalized, and then deducted upon


"abandoning the exploration project or the property."54 Most


preleasing exploration passes over vast properties before a lease


is taken, and we may surmise that most is soon deducted, under the


favorable treatment of abandonment. The portion that is allocated


to a lease is either deducted on lease surrender, or under cost


depletion.


     Other established businesses may fare as well, when seeking


property to expand,55 but not routinely, on such a scale. New


businesses must generally capitalize costs of successful search,


and forget the costs of unsuccessful search. Costs of job—search


are, with small exceptions, not deductible. Oil search gets a


much better break than job search, even though conservative econo-


mists now attribute what we used to consider the number one social—


economic problem, unemployment, to the high cost of job search.
                              — 32 —


       pensiq of early   utina frays is
and therefore much weightier than the simple numbers reveal.


Other businesses, too, succeed in expensing this or that which are


really capital outlays that build up assets, but not on such a


scale, so explicitly, or so many decades before taxable income


results.


     Substantial sums are involved. Seismology used in exploring


is the second largest user of computers, after the federal govern-


ment, and growing fast, for three—dimensional imaging of the under-


ground, and interpreting data from Landsat, Geosat, Nagsat et al.56


Exploration ranks after lease acquisition, development, and


production expense as one of the major outlays of oil firms.57


     Post—leasing exploration means drilling, mainly, and dry


holes are expensed, even on productive leaseholds. Dry holes are


an integral part of lease improvement, as noted above. In other


businesses, such things must be capitalized for the term of the


lease. Other post—leasing exploration is capitalized and recovered


through abandonment or—finally——production. But overall, the


larger share of exploration is written off before production begins.
                              — 33 —


        3.

                              -
             Imputed Income

              -


    Leaseholds generate substantial imputed income. Most imputed


land income in all industries escapes taxation. What is peculiar


to oil is the vast area——we have cited 188 million acres held by


20 firms alone—and the information monopoly at the lease lines.


    The oil lease gives exclusive rights to drill. Information


gained is proprietary, and usually not even shared with the land-


owner, e.g. the U.S. Government. So—called dry holes (all expens—


able and non—recapturable) may be at the lease edge, giving the


driller who keeps a "tight" (secret) hole a monopoly of data needed


to bid on the adjacent tract.58 This valuable product (or sometimes


by—product) is not taxable income. The extra security costs of


guarding these valuable secrets are expensable, and they are treated


like the Crown Jewels. Exploration data may also lead to finding


other valuable minerals, as Exxon has found copper in Wisconsin.


     There is also a free—riding motive. Finds and production on


other tracts may raise the value of unexplored leaseholds. A


steady stream of new exploration technology may enhance the value
                              — 34 —


of any leasehold. Revolutionary advances in satellite scanning

                           tget tOtErIaUd toifUthT

coarse screen, instead of sifting less land through a fine screen.


Favorable tax treatment of abandonments further encourages this.


This is a new kind of wildcatting, with white collars and dry


feet. New pipelines and other infrastructure may also give


lessees a free ride. Favorable tax changes are also good for


the free ride, as occurred recently when Congress exempted new


Artic production (from old leaseholds) from WPT.


     Larger firms that can afford to wait like to take positions


in many fields in many countries and regions, maximizing the proba-


bilities of getting the free ride. Each added tract leased raises


the system diversity, lowers the aggregate uncertainty, and gives


one another option. This benefit is universally recognized, but


never recognized as taxable income.


     For these benefits it may even pay one to buy and hold a


lease and finally abandon it undrilled. Better is to hold it as


long as the landowner allows, then drill at the last moment.59
                                 — 35


Major   lessees today have acquired acreage well in excess of their

drilling capacity, and we may reasonably infer that holding leases


for the        gains of holding has become a major element in the


business.60


        It always has been an element. Humble Oil, for example, sat


on the King Ranch twelve years, 1933—45, before bringing in the


second largest reserves in Texas. They neglected King because


other lessors were pressing harder, and they still are, according


to disaffected King heir Robert R. Shelton.61 The propensity to


sit on land and pray has a long history in America. But the


prayers now rise to new Gods of the Satellites which join the


traditional heavenly answering service to bring new converts and


new kingdoms within the scope of this ancient propensity to prey.


        In some areas, the monopoly factor may also rear its head.


Precluding unwanted interlopers can be an advantage, where a few


comradely firms have things under control. Sewing up the leases


is a good way to keep newcomers from getting established.
                                    — 36 —


             4.   Field Use of Crude Oil and Gas


      It takes energy to extract energy. The share used in the


field is surprisingly high, and growing higher as we get into


heavy etudes, natural gas liquids, and so on. Steam injection can


consume one—third of the oil produced.62 Gas is often reinjected


to maintain pressure drive. In Alaska's Kuparuk field, liZ of the


gas   will be reinjected; 29Z will serve the field's own fuel

needs • 63


       Field oil and gas are not taxable until sold. On the other


hand, field use is not deductible either, but this is not quite a


wash. For one thing, there is an excess, normally large, of value


over cost, which thus escapes tax. For another, field consumption


speeds depletion, thus increasing the annual depletion allowance.


We may assume there is scope for substitution between field use


and hardware items, but the latter are tangible and must be capital-


ized, thus creating a tax motive to prefer burning field crude


and gas, adding to our dependence on OPEC.
                                — 37 —


        5.     Cost Depletion


    By the time we get to production, not much cost remains to


recover, but there is the bonus, and any exploration allocated to


the producing lease. As for tangible well costs, and leasehold


equipment after the ttChristmas tree" (casinghead control), these


are recovered separately through depreciation and will not concern


us further.


     The taxpayer solution is to establish a new basis by sale. No


prior ordinary deductions are recapturable save intangibles. The


buyer gets a new cost to recover from production. It would seem


logical to transfer leaseholds just before production, and this


does seem to occur regularly. I have not examined to what extent


subsidiaries can sell to parents, to what extent prices can be


fudged, etc., but the situation invites avoidance on a grand scale


and may be one reason the IRS is several years behind in auditing


oil firms.64


     The oil ownerts next move is to accelerate depletion. Build-


ing owners may accelerate depreciation, too, but accelerated
                              — 38 —


depreciation is recaptured on sale, unlike depletion. Now that

buildings get 15 year life anyway, without acceleration and recap-


ture, oil's relative advantage is not what it was. But the absolute


advantage is still there, and worth a look.


     With ordinary leases there is a definite term, and a bonus


paid is deducted pro rata over the term of the lease. With oil


leases the term is indefinite and ends only when commercial produc-


tion ends. The bonus or other cost is deducted per unit of produc-


tion, so one begins by estimating the number of units in place. To


get in the fast lane for depletion, one low—balls the reserves, so


each unit is a higher percentage of the "total." IRS lacks the


expertise to challenge estimates by the industry and its consuF


tants, so there you are. Industry practice is to define "reserves"


In the narrowest ways anyway,65 so there is little resistance to


acceleration at this point.


     After a few years of this, we have an interesting problem


when it becomes evident that the original estimate was low. One


runs out of depletion units, but the wells still flow. At this
                                — 39 —


point one might expect a recapture of prior excess depletion, but
                                                                     S
there is no provision for this.

    There is, on the contrary, a chance for double depletion,


when a flowing lease is sold in mid—life. The buyer's basis is


his cost, less prior depletion allowed, which sounds reasonable on


the surface. But prior depletion is figured on a cash basis, not


a physical basis.66 In a rising market the prior depletion


allowed shrinks as a percentage of the new basis. For example,


owner A has a basis of $10,000. Re takes depletion of $5,000,


then sells to B for $40,000. B's new basis is $35,000 instead of


the $20,000 that would obtain if we figure that A used up half the


cost depletion units.


     Another route to low—balling reserves could be factitious


subdivision of tracts. One might plan to develop a field sequen-

tially, divide it into tracts 1, 2 and 3, and declare only the


reserves in tract 1. I have not determined how common this is,


but the regulations seem to invite it. "Various special rules


let you. •   .treat such properties as separate."67
                              — 40


    Vast interesting possibilities were opened up after 1956 by


the Southwest Exploration Company case.68 Here, owners of land


without oil in it were allowed a depletion deduction because the


access to others' oil was through their land.69 Creative taxmen


have presumably pursued this invitation since then.



         6. Miscellany


     For completeness, here are two more special benefits; for


brevity, I say little more.


     Research related spending gets a 25% tax credit in the new


tax bill. It remains expensable. Research in exploration and


recovery from marginal sources is a growing factor in oil and gas.


     WPT is deductible, from taxable income. Individuals cannot


deduct federal payroll or excise taxes from their taxable income.
                                         "Yli
                     %A4A:,
Major findings and their meaning
   The income tax bears more lightly on oil and gas income than

on most other property income and, a fortiori, than on work income. This

remains true in spite of the abatement of depletion allowance, recapture

of expensed intangibles, and a few minor reforms; and in spite of the

easier treatment given to other property income in the 1981 tax law.

   A standard list of well—known loopholes accounts for some of the pre-

ference for oil. These are the foreign tax credit; expensing intangibles;

expensing dry holes; and creative transfer pricing.    A second set of

loopholes, known but neglected by reformers, are shown to deserve as much

or more scrutiny. The remains of percentage depletion are lively. Capital

gains treatment is highly preferential for whatsoever income receives it.

Capital gains are unusually important in oil and gas firms, and the treatment

is preferential compared to that for other property. The bulk of costs are

expensed from ordinary income. Oil deposits would proper ly be treated as

an inventory item yielding ordinary income.


   The expensing of interest, while universally allowed, is especially


preferential for the oil and gas firm1working in tandem with capital gains


treatment   of value accruing in the basic inventory being financed with

borrowed money.
  A third set of loopholes are virtually invisible to reformers. The

greatest of these is expensing of leasehold abandonment, a process by

which some 802 of the de facto cost of lease acquisition is expensed from

ordinary income at an early date. Lease acquisition is now the largest

industry outlay by a wide margin. Abandonments are treated much more

favorably than capital losses.

   Exploration is also mostly expensable from ordinary income: pre—leasing

outlays via abandonment of an area; and post—leasing outlays via the dry—

bole provision, or lease abandonment.

  Imputed income on leaseholds is tax—exempt. This includes the monopoly of

information from the lease, used to bid on others. Twenty firms alone hold

188 Minion acres, making this a major item.   There is a free—riding motive


to gain value from the finds of neighbors; from price hikes; from advances

in technology (notably today with satellite scanning and computers); from


new infrastructure like pipelines and ports; from new tax breaks; and


from cornering local markets. Questing for the free ride accounts f or a

rapid increase in holdings of undeveloped acreage.

   Field use of oil and gas, a growing share of the whole, is not taxed.
Finally, the remainder of undeducted costs are depletable per unit of

production. Depletion is inflatable by acceleration without recapture,

followed by resale and redepletion of a large part at an advanced price.

   The inequity of these provisions is manifest. Oil and gas firms cluster

at the top of Fortunets 500; and corporate shares generally are more closely

held than any other asset in the probated estates examined by Lampman,

               l0
Smith and others. Royalties and bonuses go to prior owners of land.

Drilling tax shelter partnerships are for those with high outside income.

   The inequity is offset in the degree that benefits are passed through to

buyers in lower prices: offset, but traded for misallocation of resources

and overall national inefficiency. Because shifting implies elastic

supply, which results from reallocating scarce resources to this industry.
And there is a new kind of inequity created, because big energy consumers

gain at the expense of other consumers. Energy is probably a superior good

to consumers, overall. Studies purporting to show otherwise are of a piece

with a spate of earlier studies alleging the property tax to be regressive,

studies invalidated by use of the most elementary statistical blunders
                                         11
driving them to their foregone conclusion. And in production, energy corn—
                                  '1 -
                                                     it
plements land and capital and substitutes for labor, with obvious

regressive effects on the distribution of income.

   Besides drawing too much capital into the industry, tax favors also

induce serious distortions within the industry. Expensing, for one, is

inherently bias ed against small, new and marginal firms that often lack

other cash flow against which to take expenses. A nasty little .t

makeç expensing, once taken, a binding option companywide, denying flexi-

bility in tines   £nall firms      needtL the most. Capital gains pre-

ferences are of the greatest value to firms with financial reserves and

waiting power to hold the most leases the longest time. Host tax favors

involve some interplay of early expensing and deferred gains or sales, a

game reserved mainly for players with many chips. Tax factors like these

are bound to bias the structure of industry toward the top. This pervasive

bias is somewhat countervat I.ed by the specific cap on percentage depletion,

although this cap is arguably too low to help most firms large enough not

to be dependents of the majors.

   The most consistent, total, unrelieved bias is in favor of investing up-


stream, "before the Christmas Tree"    (controls at the wellhea4. Lease im-

provements on the surface, after the Tree —— stock   tanks, pipes, roads,

clearing, drainage, housing, etc. — receive no special favors. It is rather
                              1)
drilling, pumping, exploring, and especially acquiring and holding leases

that get the biggest breaks. These are the most purely acquisitive and

appropriative activities in the business, the ones that wrest raw resources

from Nature and from rival men, the ones most like rape and the least like

husbandry. This set of bias as in the law speaks volumes about the social

psychology of people who shape and are shaped by them.

   Some defend favors to explorers by citing spillover benefits to neighborss.j

lands. Perhaps there is such a case, although, if so, it applies as well


to city buildings that upgrade their neighborhoods, to stores that raise


neighborhood rents, and to city workers in labor pools that enhance ind:astriaJ.


values. But what, then, about the free—riding neighbors? Should they not

be singled out to pay the subsidy? Here is where the tax law fails utterly.

Free riders with unearned increments get the best breaks of all, through


combined expensing of abandonments and capital gains for winners. The


industry responds by directing most of its new investment into hoarding up


millions of acres of leaseholds, held idle, just hitch—hiking.

   Another bias is in favor of bonus bidding for leaseholds. Reformers in


this field have pushed for years for other leasing policies on public lands,
                            -Li'—

with provisions to defer payments by lessees, thus opening the door to

bids from weaker firms with less cash reserve$• Weak firms have proven

too passive in supporting these reforms. A reason for this is the very

favorable tax treatment of bonuses, which are largely expensable by abandon—

Tint of losers. But royalties and other deferred payments do much less well.

So the whole industry is locked into the bonus system for its tax benefits.

A distinguished critic of high bonuses, Main Smith, found them to be hurt-

ful to lessor, lessee, and everyone else. Re advised us to discourage their
                                                 13
use by taxing them much heavier than annual payments. Our tax laws do the

opposite, to our expense.

   tax law discourages use of certain lease provisions specifically designed

to penalize free riding. One is the delay rental, a yearly charge that

ends when production begins, an obvious incentive tool. A simple annual

rental of modest amount is expenssble, as noted earlier. But the privi-

lege is precarious and may be lost in two ways. A large rental is liable

to be construed as a delayed bonus, hence to be capitalized. A returnable

rental which is creditable against later royalties — a double incentive to

action — is considered an "advance royalty" and may not be expensed.7LL
                              -Hi-
But the loss to the lessee is no gain to the lessor. To him, the receipts

are   ordinary current income. Bonuses and royalties, to be sure, are also

ordinary: but they get offset by cost depletion, which rentals do not.

   If the lessor is non—taxable anyway that makes no difference. But industry

customs, often binding, grew up long ago when most lessors were private.

Lessor and lessee both suffered by using delay rentals So to this day

industry custom treats delay rentals like poor cousins.

   Another device of lessors is the work commitment: a lease is auctioned

or negotiated subject to the lessee's commitment to spend a given sum on

exploration or development, or to perform specified acts. Tax calamity!

All the expensoble items become lease acquisition costs: expensing
         -Ic-
denied.


      Tax law is also hostile to field unitization. Surplus wells shut in upon

                                               i aa.ra. avna.e. a&t.tv.ces/&414,i
unitization      ore not allowed to be abandonedA One source says that

all Intangible outlays must then be capitalized, but I have not confirmed

this. It is certain, though, that unitization slows cost depletion. The

whole pay zone, and perhaps more, are now treated as a unit.

      Cost depletion creates the principle that "cheaply bought is ill used."

Tax avoiders naturally allocate production to leaseholds of higher cost
basis. Those of lower basis can be held for sale. Negotiating a sale

may take years, In

A lease may be held by producing a token flow. Others are often extended

by complaisant officials. One abandoned lease off Santa Barbara was

returned to Pauley Oil, even after several yearswhen oil was found next
    16
door.

   But most big finds are cheaply bought under our bonus bidding system

of shooting in the dark. Most of the true cost basis is written off

by abandoning losers. The funds remaining tied up in the winners are

away below their value. Not until the market has churned a few times

are many leases ready to milk for the greatest tax advantage. Meantime,

the lease speculator sits on his assets with minimal holding. costs.

   The sum of these tax—induced biases is extremely distorting, and

patently inequitable. It is as though the laws were written by and for

the free—riders at the expense of all. Thoroughgoing reform is in order.

In a nation of hitch—hikers, no one rides.



                     f'IV $
                                   NOTES


    -1Aa -ed4t-Bona- BWSI WEE-4                 ember-2ard98') -__---
    2Energy Giants Taxed at Middle Class Rate, Riverside PRESS—
     ENTERPRISE A—3 (June 6, 1981).
    3A High—powered Drive to Raise the Tas Tax, BUSINESS WEEK 52
     (November 23, 1981).

    4Kemp and Cohen, Impact of Oil Production Tax, PETROLEUM
     ECONOMIST (January 1981).

     James Love, "The Structure of State Taxes on Oil Production,"
     45 (draft ifs, May 1980).

     Roger Brinier, cited in The Energy Edge, BUSINESS WEEK 22
     (November 2, 1981).

    5Capital Investment, BUSINESS WEEK 22 (November 2, 1981).

    6What the Oil Drillers Cain from the Tax Bill, BUSINESS WEEK 30
     (August 17, 1981).

•   7Paine Webber Co., Investment Perspectives 2 (Mid—June 1981).

    8Energy Action, "Study Shows Oil Companies Hoarding Potential Oil
     and Gas Lands," Press Release (May 11, 1981).

    9Data collected by writer, 1965, from Planning Department, City of
     Milwaukee.

    10Calculated from THE FORTUNE DIRECTORY (1980).

    'tM. ASIMOW, CILBERT LAW SUMMARIES, INCOME TAX I § 341,a (11th ed,
      1978).

     PRENTICE—HALL, FEDERAL TAX COURSE 2106 (1980).

    12PRENTIC&PLJ op.cit. 2106.

    13• MCDONALD, FEDERAL TAX TREATMENT OF INCOME FROM OIL AND GAS 23
      (1963).

    '4BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION, SETTING INTERCORPORATE PRICING
     POLICIES (1973).
     TAX INSTITUTE OF AMERICA, TAXATION OF FOREIGN INCOME (1966).

     D. Tillinghast, The Application of Section 482 to International
     Operations, 24th ANNUAL N.Y.U. INSTITUTE 1433 (1967).
Notes                         —2—

15A. Bagamer3 In the best of families, FORBES 92 (June 2, 1981).

'6G. Brannon, Taxation and the Political Economy of the Energy
  "Crisis," Read and Utton, U.S. ENERGY POLICY 127 (1978).

'7INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, Publication 535, Business Expenses
  and Operatitig Losses (Rev. Nov. 1980).

'8lbid 26.

190i1 Companies Fight Well Ruling, Riverside PRESS—ENThEPRISE B—il
  (January 20, 1981).

20J4 CHIRELSTEIN, FEDERAL INCOME TAXATION 260—61 (2nd Ed. 1979).

21Ibid 69.

2211. GAFFNEY, Coordinating Tax Incentives and Public Policy: The
  Treatment of Land Income, U.S. Congress, Joint Economic Committee,
  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS AND THE EFFICIENCY OF GOVERNMENT 405 (1969).

23The intangible part is now subject to recapture, however.

24350 U.s. 46 (1955).

25CHIRELSTEIN op.cit. 271.

  J. K. MCNULTY, FEDERAL INCOME TAXATION OF INDIVIDUALS 362, (2nd ed.,
  1978).

26s. MCDONALD, FEDERAL TAX TREATMENT OF INCOME FROM OIL AND GAS 93
  (1963).
27MCDONALD op.clt 23.

28GETTY OIL CO., ANNUAL REPORT 62—65 (1980).

29Ibjd 37.
301b1d   62, ri.2
31LOVE op.cit. 13.

32252 U.S. 189 (1920).

3O9 U.S. 461 (1940).

34Why Oil Explorers Seek Cerman Backing, BUSINESS WEEK 100
  (June 26, 1979).

35PAINE WEBBER et al., INDUSTRY REVIEW 2 (March 6, 1981).
Notes                          —3--


36K. Tuinulty, Oil Drilling Tax Shelters, L.A. TINES 1 (May 5, 1981).

37llarathon Farms Out 3 Blocks off Ireland, L.A. TINES 3 (January 2,
  1982).

38GETFY OIL CO., ANNUAL REPORT 58 (1980).

39Ibid.

40L. CHAVEZ, Occidental to Sell Stakes, L.A. TIMES 1 (January 9,
  1981).

41What the Oil Drillers Gain from the Tax Bill, BUSINESS WEEK 30
  (August 17, 1981).

42K. Tunulty, Arco Opens New Alaska Oil Field, L.A. TINES IV—1
  (December 17, 1981).

43Energy Action, op.cit.

44NCDONALD, op.cit. 5.

45M. GAYFNEY, OIL AND GAS LEASING POLICY: ALTERNATIVES FOR ALASKA
  IN 1977 31 (1977).

46oii Firms Give Up Offshore Leases, L.A. TIMES 1 (Ca. November
  1980).
47G.. SCHAFER, R. VISSE, AND C. BARBER!, ELEMENTS OF INCOME TAX—
  INDIvIDUAL 14—3 (1978).

48Reduce Crowding, Gain Tax Deduction, AVOCADO GROWER 33 (December
  1981).
49CRIRELSTEIN 138.

50SCRAFER et al 8—1 to 8—19.
51Ibid.
52ANERICAN PETROLEUM INSTIThTE, INDEPENDENT PETROLEUM ASSOCIATION
  OF AMERICA and MIDCONTINENT OIL AND GAS ASSOCIATION, JOINT
  ASSOCIATION SURVEY 4 (Nay 1976). This survey Covered 364 firms
  accounting for an estimated 77% of net domestic revenues from oil
  and gas.
53J. Sweeney, Offshore Oil Tract Draws Record Bid, L.A. TIMES 1
  (May 29,   1981).
54PRENTICE—RALL, FEDERAL TAX COURSE 2114 (1980).
  MCDONALD 17.
Notes                          —4—


55ASIHOW 49, § 269.

56Finding Resources without Drilling, BUSINESS WEEK 56 (July 6, 1981).

           PETROLEUM INSTITUTE et at., be. cit.

  GETTY OIL CO., toe cit.

58"Clair Chylin, genera]. manager of Chevron's Land Department,
  Western Region, said Chevron's bids on the four southernmost
  tracts (Santa Maria Basin sale) were based on information
  obtained from wells drilled on adjacent Chevron lease—holdings
  acquired in a previous sale," 3. Sweeney, op.cit. Texas Oil
  and Gas Corporation, "drills mostly on prospects right next
  door to (its) own and other companies' finds." T. Mark, The
  Low Rollers, FORBES 117 (February 1, 1982).

59tarry L. Smith of Shell Oil "said Shell and other oil companies
  are keeping other leases. . .because of the possibility a corn—
  petitor will strike oil or gas nearby. Re said companies also
  hold onto leases because last—minute exploratory drilling could
  yield important geological clues to the area." Oil Firms Give
  Up Offshore Leases, op.cit.

60The GAO has determined that exploratory drilling has occurred on
  only 11% of the federal tracts leased on the Pacific Shelf,
  1970—79. Outer—Continental Shelf Leasing, L.A. TIMES 1, July 24,
  1981.

6tBagauery op.cit.
ó2cas from Coo, TItlE 45 (April 28, 1980).
63J( Tumulty, Arco Opens New Alaska Oil Field, L.A. TIMES IV—1
  (December 17, 1981).

64Federal auditors finished their work on the 1967 tax return of
  Socal in 1976, 9 years after the events; California auditors in
  1977. Socal appealed the California audit. The case came to
  the Board of Equalization in October 1981. R. Fairbanks,
  $4.9 million Tax Appeal Case to Open, LA TINES 3, (October 26,
  1981).

  I.R.S. experts interviewed in 1977 in the Oil and Gas Unit,
  Los Angeles office, were thoroughly familiar with conditions
  three years past, but only generally aware of current changes
  in this rapidly changing body of law. Guy Phillips, Memo to
  writer, January 25, 1977.

65W. LOVEJOY and P. HOMAN, METHODS OF ESTIMATING RESERVES OF CRUDE
  OIL (1965).
_I __111 _——
  66SCRAFER et al, bc. cit.

  67INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, Publication 535, p. 26.

  68350 U.S. 308 (1956).

  69• Agria, Special Tax Treatment of the Mineral Industries, in
    A. C. HARBERCER and H. BAILEY, TRE TAXATION OF INCOME FROM
    CAPITAL 83 (1969).
Notes                        —6—



70ROBERT LA1PMAN, THE SHARE OF THE TOP WEALTH-HOLDERS IN
  NATIONAL WEALTH (1962).

  James Smith and S. Calvert, Estimating the Wealth of Top
  Wealth-holders from Estate—tax Returns, ANERICM STATISTICAL
  ASSOCIATION, 1965 PROCEEDINGS 258.

71These errors have been analyzed in N. Oaf they, The Property
  Tax is a Progressive Tax, PROCEEDINGS OF 66th M'1NUAL
  CONFERENCE OF THE NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION 408 (1972).

72 Berndt and D. Wood, Technology, Prices and the Derived
  Demand for Energy, REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STATISTICS 259
  (August, 1975).
73A. SMITH, WEALTH OF NATIONS 783 (ed. E. CANNAN, 1937).

        Phillips, op. cit.

75Thw.

76E. flume, House Panel Olts Favor for 9 Oil Firms, LOS MGELES
  TIMES 2 (July 9, 1981).
