Exiractive Resources and Taxation
Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored
by the Committee on Taxation, Resources,
and Economic Development (TRED) at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 1964
E xtractive
Resources
and Taxation

EDITED BY

Mason Gaffney




The University of Wisconsin Press
Madison, Milwaukee, and London
1967
Published by the University of Wisconsin Press
Madison, Milwaukee, and London
U.S.A.: Box 1379, Madison, Wisconsin 53701
U.K.: 26—28 Hallam Street, London W. i

Copyright      1967 by the
Regents of the University of Wisconsin
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
by the North Central Publishing Company
St. Paul, Minnesota

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 67-20755
    2.2='




                         gt
                          EkpORL,
                                 EC      '70




   To Weld S. Carter, master of friendly persuasion,
who so gently inspired the series of conferences that
fostered this book; who sustained its editor through
the conclusion; and who continues along his construc-
tive way; the editor affectionately dedicates this vol-
ume, confident that every contributor will applaud the
choice.




                      59238
  Contributors



B. Delworth Gardner
 Professor of Business Economics
 Director of the Center for Social Science Research on Natural
 Resource Problems
 Utah State University, Logan, Utah
Orris C. Herfindahi
 Senior Research Associate, Resources for the Future, Inc.
 1755 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.

John D. Hogan
 Staff Economist, Northwestern Life Insurance Company
 Lecturer in Economics, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
 Lecturer in Managerial Statistics, Marquette University
 Milwaukee, Wisconsin
David D. Martin
 Professor of Economics
 Graduate School of Business Economics
 Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana
Stephen L. McDonald
 Professor of Economics
 University of Texas, Austin, Texas
Walter J. Mead
 Professor of Economics
 University of California, Santa Barbara, California
Irving Morrissett
 Associate Professor of Economics, Graduate School of Industrial
 Administration
 Director of the Social Science Education Consortium, Inc.
 Purdue University, Lafayette, Indiana
Giulio Pontecorvo
 Professor of Business Economics and Coordinator of Doctoral Studies
 Columbia University Graduate School of Business
 New York, New York
                            vii
viii                                                        Contributors

       Warren Roberts
        Professor of Political Science
        Wabash College, Craw fordsville, Indiana
       Anthony T. Scott
        Professor of Political Economics
        University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia

       James A. Seagraves
        Associate Professor of Agricultural Economics
        North Carolina State College, Raleigh, North Carolina

       Henry Steele
        Professor of Economics
        University of Houston, Houston, Texas
       William Vickrey
        Professor and Chairman, Department of Economics
        Columbia University, New York, New York
       Gene Wunderlich
         Chief, Resource Institutions Branch, Resource Development
        Economics Division, Economic Research Service
         U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
         Acknowledgments



   To consider enumerating the hundreds who have added to this work
is a humbling experience for the editor under whose name it now ap-
pears. There were typists, wives, earlier writers, research assistants,
teachers, editors, friends, critical colleagues, parents, foundation and
academic administrators, philanthropists — the list begins to stagger
one, not to mention taxpayers! It is a lesson in the technical complexity
of human cooperation, but even more in the spiritual wonder of irra-
tional mutual confidence, without which there would be nothing. Imag-
ine: each of fourteen writers labors painstakingly over his lonely manu-
script in the confidence that thirteen others, whom he hardly knows, are
doing the same; that their joint product may be articulated and accept-
able to a reputable publisher; that concerned intelligent readers may
match their effort by responsive study, and give life to their thought by
incorporating some of it among the ideas which move them; and that
the acts of these concerned readers may thread their way through the
perils of politics to influence legislators and administrators. What ana-
lyst, reasoning a priori from mechanistic axioms about individual opti-
mization, would ever anticipate such group dynamics? It is too absurd
even to contemplate — but here it is. That "man is a social animal"
bears on ever so much more than cocktail parties. Man likes to give to
exciting enterprises, and what you find in these pages are gifts of men
and women who found this enterprise exciting.
   In 1964 the Robert Schalkenbach Foundation financed a conference
at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee on "Tax Treatment of
Exhaustible Resources," at which the chapters of this book were orig-
inally presented as discussion papers. To the Foundation goes our appre-
ciation, and to its amiable Executive Secretary, V. G. Peterson, with
whom it is always a pleasure to work. The Conference was sponsored by
the Committee on TRED, to whose Chairman and founding father,
Professor Arthur P. Becker, the editor owes special thanks. Professor
Becker had the rare courage to lend his name and talent to encouraging
renewed study of natural resources as a tax base at a time when the
                                   ix
  x                                                   Acknowledgments

topic suffered under a peculiar historical stigma that discouraged seri-
ous consideration. His remarkable success in restoring the topic to the
dignity of a respectable subject for analysis and discussion is attested
to by the stature of the contributors to this and other annual confer-
ences of the Committee on Taxation, Resources and Economic Devel-
opment (TRED), and of the other members of TRED: Paul Alyea, Karl
Falk, Richard Lindholm, Carl McGuire, and William Vickrey.
   Mrs. Faye Levner has shepherded the editor through the valleys of
style and pitfalls of footnotes and risen loyally to every crisis. Michèle
Consigny has applied her genius to graphs and equations and inspired
the editor as only a brilliant student can by mastering the analysis and
bringing it to bear on more difficult questions before the ink was dry on
this manuscript. Dennis Jesmok helped prepare the index and scanned
the literature as the editor's radar. William Vickrey and Stephen
McDonald have been notably generous in their help to the editor.
  The Harvard University Press kindly let us reprint L. C. Gray's
article, "Rent Under the Assumption of Exhaustibility," from the
Quarterly Review of Economics, 28 (May 1914), 464—89.
  Above all, the editor thanks his contributors. Each man who gave of
his time and talent acted out his faith in the editor — more perhaps
than he realized — a faith which led the editor to greater toils than ever
he expected, but which he appreciates no less for all that. Each con-
tributor acted out his faith in each of the others, and each was inspired
to greater effort by the trust of the others. All of us owe the final debt
to the wonderful social tradition of voluntary group action —a means
to common ends, but a means so gratifying that, if it should be the end
as well, it would be enough.
                                                                  M.G.
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
March, 1967
    Contents



    List of Contributors
    Editor's Introduction
                     Part I Theoretical Foundation
   Introduction                                                          3
1 A Functional Distribution Theory and Analysis of Returns
    from Commodity Programs for Tobacco and Oil                         11
                                               James A. Sea graves
2 The Theory of the Mine Under Conditions of Certainty                  25
                                                 Anthony T. Scott
3 Depletion and Economic Theory                                         63
                                               Orris C. Herfindahl
4 Resource Exploitation and Optimum Tax Policies: A Con-
   trol Model Approach                                                  91
                                                     John D. Hogan

                     Part II Economic Institutions
    Introduction                                                       109
    Resource Control and Market Power                                  i 19
                                                 David D. Martin
6 Resource Control as a Basis for Market Power: The Case
   of Timber                                                           '39
                                                     Walter J. Mead

7   Optimization and Taxation in an Open-Access Resource:
    The Fishery                                                        157
                                                Giulio Pontecorvo
8 Toward a Disposal Policy for Federally Owned Oil Shales              i6g
                                              B. Delworth Gardner
g Mine Taxation in Developing Countries                                197
                                                     Warren Roberts
                            Part III Policy
    Introduction                                                       219
10 Natural Resource Taxation: Resource Allocation and Dis-
    tribution Implications                                             233
                                                        Henry Steele
                                   xi
 xii                                                        Contents

i i Percentage Depletion, Expensing of Intangibles, and Pe-
     troleum Conservation                                        269
                                         Stephen L. McDonald
12 Taxing and Exploiting Oil: The Dakota Case                    289
                                            Gene Wunderlich

13 Economic Theory and Resource Policy                           295
                                             Irving Morrissett
14 Economic Criteria for Optimum Rates of Depletion              315
                                              William Vickrey
    Editor's Conclusion                                          333
                                                Lewis C. Gray

   Appendix: Rent Under the Assumption of Exhaustibility         423
   Index                                                         447
         Editor c Introduction
         MASON GAFFNEY




              The Importance of Extractive Resources
  Mankind signalizes the importance of extractive resources in a
number of traditional ways. Nations insist on some political control
of their own supplies of raw materials, believing that these are limita-
tional inputs vital to national survival. Among oligopoly firms the same
tendency prevails — most mills try to capture their own resource reserves,
in spite. of the inflated capital requirements, because the free market in
most ores is not reliable and resource ownership is, or might become, a
lever of exploitation or control. This insistence on controlling one's
own supplies constitutes in the aggregate, indeed, an overrecognition
of the importance of extractive resources. It often fosters premature
development of excessive reserves: in mining and oil firms the asset-
output ratio is higher than in any other industry.
 • Federal stockpiling of strategic minerals is another traditional ac-
knowledgment of the importance of exhaustible resources. Subsidy for
exploration is another. Social and legal pressures to retard withdrawal
of minerals and to discourage exports are yet others. Every month or
two produces its new jeremiad against rising population and living
standards, with intimations of Malthusian doom.
  Probably most economists would agree that those traditional feelings
are, on the whole, overwrought. But there are more sober indicators
of the. true importance of exhaustible resources. One is the higher wage
level in the United States. The perennial question "How can American
firms compete with foreign firms which pay lower wage rates?" has as
                                   xli'
  xiv                                              Editor's Introduction

part of its perennial answer that the marginal productivity of American
laborers is perennially elevated by their more generous complement of
raw materials.
  Monopolization of strategic deposits of raw materials is one of the
more common means of controlling markets; and in World War II
federal priorities and rationing of raw materials were key levers in con-
trol of the economy. Exhaustible resources are especially susceptible to
concentrated ownership because the workable, accessible high-quality
deposits are limited. Again, the long waiting period between early
exploration and ultimate liquidation of many deposits favors concen-
tration of ownership. Only a handful of the ultra-affluent can afford to
wait half a century between investment and liquidation; and if we
measure the extreme range from first exploration to the last yield from
a mine, more than fifty years would be a realistic life. In extractive
industries, an average reserve-output ratio of twenty years would not be
unusual. But that is like an inventory that turns over only five times a
century. Within the industries the financial Titans tend to specialize
in carrying the financial burden of holding valuable reserves, a pattern
of ownership that helps set the stage for market and social control. In
any complete list of giant corporations and giant personal and family
fortunes, mineral holders are conspicuous near the top: oil and gas,
coal and iron, and in Europe "chemicals" are paramount; followed by
copper, sulfur, lead and zinc, gold and silver, molybdenum, bauxite,
uranium, phosphate, potash, nickel, and so on through the list of useful
elements.
  In public finance, special treatment of exhaustible resources provides
one of the major loopholes through which property income escapes taxa-
tion. The value of the depletion allowance is a matter of some billions
of dollars each year. And in many local jurisdictions the assessor is ill-
equipped to put a proper valuation on subsurface mineral possibilities
for property-tax purposes.
   The development of exhaustible resources is also a source of economic
instability. This, like the concentration of ownership, follows from the
long waiting period between early exploration and final liquidation.
Natural resources might be described as a capital investment of unusual
duration. The more durable a capital good, of course, the more subject
it is to the acceleration principle and cobweb-type oscillations. Its value
is sensitive to small changes in interest rates. Economic instability,
studied both empirically and theoretically, is widely agreed to relate
MASON GAFFNEY                                                             XV


closest to investment in durable assets. Added to this, natural-resource
owners are prone to form cartels, with their tendency to hold a price
umbrella that stimulates submarginal developments and leads, over a
long swing of perhaps a generation, to the development of excess
capacity and an ultimate boomerang that collapses prices and cartels.
             The Conference Topic in the TRED ProgTam
   Exhaustible resources and their taxation also constitute important
links in the development of economic and fiscal theory and policy. It
is this that makes the subject appropriate for a symposium sponsored
by the Committee on Taxation, Resources and Economic Development
(TRED).i TRED is an association of economists sharing a common in-
terest in the use of taxation to assert the public interest in natural
resources. TRED works to foster a usable modern literature in its field
to help acquaint the profession and the public with the best thinking
that economists have to offer, and thereby to help guide intelligent
policy. TRED's function is to bring advanced thinking to bear particu-
larly on the moot and difficult questions that earlier writers have skirted
or abandoned in confusion. TRED's philosophy is not to push policy
positions as foregone conclusions, but to enlist the help of able econo-
mists to clarify the challenging unresolved issues in resource taxation,
with the faith that solutions will evolve from the conflict and discussion.
   The committee recognized that the traditional rationale for heavier
taxation of natural resources rests heavily on the concept of fixed sup-
ply, as so unhappily expressed by Ricardo in his "original and indestruc-
tible powers of the soil." Because of this, some economists and policy-
makers regard the arguments for heavier taxation of land as inapplicable
to exhaustible resources. At the same time, at the other extreme, there
is a strong current of thought, the "natural heritage" theory, which
regards natural resources as properly national property, and by "natural
resources" purports exhaustible ones primarily (implicitly excluding
surface extension and location). This is partly a philosophy of distribu-
tive equity, but includes a strain of skepticism of the workability of the
market in resources, and perhaps, too, of the normative value of even
a perfect market in matters of conservation particularly, and inter-
  1 Other symposia have treated "Land Value Taxation and Urban Economic Prob-

lems," chaired by Professor Arthur Becker; "Land Reform and Tax Reform in Less
Developed Countries," chaired by Professor Carl McGuire; and "Property Taxation,
US.A.," chaired by Dean Richard Lindholm.
  xvi                                                  Editor's Introduction

temporal economizing generally. Thus we have one school that would
minimize the fiscal assertion of public equity in extractive resources, and
another that would control or socialize them. Here isa "moot and diffi-
cult" question worthy of our steel.
  Not all economists accept the idea that even inexhaustible natural
resources should be loaded with heavier taxes. Some economists main-
tain that the private receiver of ground rent requires it to motivate
essential economic functions. These defenses are, however, relatively
transparent and easily penetrated.
   Among agricultural economists, for example, the idea is seriously
advanced that absentee landlords serve the essential economic function
of assuming the financial burden of carrying title to expensive land.
This is a rather straightforward fallacy of composition. The individual
absentee landlord does indeed perform this function for the tenant,
but landlords collectively simply lower the capitalization rate, raising
prices out of reach of tenants who lack comparable ownership of, or
access to, long-term funds. Thereby, landlords collectively necessitate
the very function which they individually perform. The argument fails
to distinguish, a cynic might say succeeds in confusing, price-determined
and price-determining factor payments. (The cynic might be wrong—
the confusion could arise without malice, simply from adopting the
individual farm-management viewpoint and forgetting the need for
transposition from individual to social economics.)
  Again, economists teach that the function of rent is to ration the
land supply among competing users, even if it does not serve the double
function of other factor payments which elicit the supply as well as
ration it. Some economists take this as the functional rationale for
private receipt of rent.
  This is to ignore, however, that rent can still serve to ration the
supply even if heavy taxes are imposed, just so the taxes are independent
of the allocation, or if they are levied as a percentage of net rather than
gross rent.2 Resources can also be, and many are, owned by government
and leased to the highest bidder, without violating free-market prin-
ciples or depriving any economic function of its motivation.
   However, with exhaustible resources the arguments for private col-
lection of resource rent are not so easily demolished. Here, price has
the function of regulating conservation over time, and also the func-
  2 The last method, a land-income tax, has the demerit of exempting implicit and

psychic income, and therefore works a material bias against uses that yield cash.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                               Xvii

tion of eliciting supply tO replace exhausted resources To be sure, the
more enthusiastic ex parte arguments are overstated when the social
costs of exploration are alleged to include lease payments to passive land-
owners. Such lease payments and "points," along with the traditional
one-eighth royalty,3 are obviously price-determined rents, and not func-
tional in eliciting supply. But all cases get overstated by sonieone with-
out destroying the case. If we trim off the overstatement there remains
a troublesome nub of substance in the claims of a need for privately
collected rent income to foster conservation and replacement of ex-
hausted resources.
  And so the present symposium was organized by TRED to help
advance our thinking about natural-resource taxation under conditions
of exhaustibility. Given the subtleties of the topic, it is unavoidable
that the symposium should also contribute to economic theoi-y, and to
a better understanding of the economic institution of property, of
market structures, of concentration of wealth and power, and other
central concerns of economists.
  There are only a few high-quality publications dealing with this im-
portant subject. Some aspects are almost entirely untreated such as
the proper place of depletion in the national income accounts; capital-
ization of different kinds of taxes on exhaustible resOurces, and the
effect of tax capitalization on output rates; the relative social efficiency
of public versus private exploration, and the proper division of fünc-
tion between them; a correct imputation of the final product between
the early prospector, the financier, and the public, whose work helps add
value to mineral deposits over the years; the capacity of natural re-
sources to yield tax revenues; the use of probability theory in appraising
and assessing incompletely known underground deposits; the dynamics
of expansion and collapse of cartels and their relation to business cycles;
and the lessons of wartime federal control of priorities and rationing for
peacetime policy.
  Some areas are more marked by controversy than consensus, such as
the effect of corporate income taxes on the durability of investments;
the incidence of benefits from depletion allowances; and the choice of
a proper discount rate.
   Most topics the existing literature touches on have simply been
  ' Note that this is ½ of gross welihead or mine-mouth value. It is more than /8 of
the net rent of the resource — it may be the whole of it where production Costs are
high. Our concern here is with the net rent to land, not the gross-value product.
  xviii                                           Editor's Introduction

treated by too few economists to produce a meaningful consensus. The
neglect of the field by the profession as a whole is betrayed by the lack
of treatment in most elementary economics textbooks. Little as has
been done, most of that little remains to be widely understood, even by
economists. The Committee on TRED therefore believes the present
volume may serve a useful role in a field marked by overall neglect,
unresolved controversy, and undistributed literature.
                  The Articulation of the Chapters
  The symposium comprises chapters on economic theory, economic
institutions, and economic policy.
  Few of the chapters fall entirely in one of the above classes, but
overlap. The overlap makes the symposium. The papers were discussed
by the participants for three days and revised. The interplay of differ-
ent minds on the same topic, the constructive tension generated by
differing viewpoints, and the richness of background of the several con-
tributors, are the unique values of the symposium approach.
  Each writer supplies some new insight into the common topics of
the symposium, as well as expertise on his special subtopic. Comparing
each writer's treatment of the common themes is like watching a land-
scape change with the clouds and the hour. Each brings a fresh eye for
what is vital; each points up aspects that others have shadowed out.
The human experience, the accumulated wisdom of several lifetimes,
and the ingenuity of their several creative minds are represented here
among our distinguished experts. The collective result has a depth and
animated movement that displays, better than any individual author,
the fullness and variety of its subject.
  The editor made little effort to achieve consistency or consensus. Yet
it is remarkable how much consistency (except of terminology!) and
consensus emerged. The profession evidently is moving towards a gen-
erally accepted position in this still underdeveloped subdiscipline. That
might suggest banality, but on the contrary the points of consensus in-
clude some shockers for anyone schooled in the conventional rhetoric
either of "business" or of "conservation."
Part I THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
         Introduction



                              Imputation
   Professor James A. Seagraves took on the important preliminary task
of clarifying the imputation of returns to different inputs. Part of our
intellectual heritage from the Fabian Society has been that production
is a joint cooperative endeavor in which the contributions of individual
factors are merged and not identifiable. In this position the left wing
has received support from the right, as rent-receivers resisted clear-cut
imputation of returns and sought to camouflage rent elements with more
functional and, socially defensible elements of their income. Today,
Communist critics of capitalism, as Professor Warren Roberts brings
out in Chapter 9 of this book, are not eager (and probably not able) to
help distinguish functional from non-functional income; that is the
task of the defenders. Marginal analysis, of course, has been the tool of
those seeking to clarify the analysis of income distribution.
  Professor Seagraves points out that modern developments in linear
programming have advanced a step beyond marginal analysis in tying
specific contributions to specific inputs.
  Using case studies in agriculture and petroleum, Seagraves concludes
that the natural resource input, because of its relative fixity, tends to
receive the primary benefit of tax favors, or other favors, 'to specific
industries. This is a conclusion that hangs on' the specificity of the
resources to the industries, and would not apply to highly versatile land
                                                       '
inputs and narrowly defined industries.
  Professor Seagraves also brings to our attention some interesting
political results of tenure institutions controlling mineral rights. He
points out that a large share of political support for tax' and other favors
to mineral producers might logically be expected from lañdholdérs who
have not yet signed leases. They are in a stronger position to capture the
gains than those under contract already. The latter, drawing one-eighth
of the gross, also tend to support higher prices. Lessees have ri ore lever-
age than any other group and might reasonably spearhead the move-
  4                                                       Theoretical Foundation

ment. The three groups together are a political Troika to conjure with,
indeed.
   L. C. Gray's classic "Rent under the Assumption of Exhaustibility"
is reprinted in the Appendix. We include the article because it is basic
to our subject; our contributors refer to it often; and it is not readily
accessible to many readers.
   Gray faces the basic question of how much depletion charge to deduct
from the cash flow of mines, after other costs, to determine what portion
of the flow is properly rent income. Gray attempts to determine how
much the miner should let depletion retard his rate of extraction; how
he should respond to higher prices that lift his mine above the marginal
level; and how the public should tax mines.
  On the, first question, Gray's answer surprises one: he would deduct
nothing from income for depletion of the substance of the resource.
Depletion, he says, is simply the present value of future rent foregone
to realize present rent. He regards the entire cash flow as rent. His
emphasis is more on the concept of rent as a surplus above social costs
than it is on rent as an income; but he avoids the questions of discovery
and replacement cost, so that the issue is never clearly posed.
   On this one point, our current contributors do not all follow Gray.
Henry Steele, in Chapter io of this book, specifically criticizes Gray for
neglecting replacement of exhausted resources. It may be that Gray
was implicitly assuming a resource something like the oil shale which
B. Delworth Gardner treats in Chapter 8, whose discovery cost is
negligible and whose replacement cost would consist entirely of capital-
ized rents paid to passive landowners. In such cases, Gray is telling us
something important. The economic surplus, which might be socialized
without impairing functional, incentives, is the full surplus of gross
income over non-land costs. He is rejecting the notion of rent as a
surplus of income above opportunity cost, where the foregone opportu-
nity is simply another way of realizing some rent in this case by with-
drawing a mineral in the future instead of the present.
   Even with petroleum, a large share of exploration "costs" are lease
acquisition and rental payments to passive landowners.1 Yet another
large share are real social costs, so it does seem that we should modify
Gray's stand on this account. Gray says we might take the entire return
to land in taxes and not impair functional incentives at all. Most con-
      In 1960, Big million dollars Out of 2,045 million dollars, or about 40 per cent
of oil exploration costs were for leases. (See 3, p. 287 n.)
INTRODUCTION                                                                   5

tributors feel we must leave something to motivate replacement; the
interesting question is, How much?
  Yet Gray sets the tone for much of our discussion. He begins to supply
us with an analytical framework for appraising depletion if we do
choose to net it out of rent income. Depletion is the loss of future rent
caused by realizing present rent. Depletion is usually small relative to
present rent because the lost future rent must be discounted over the
life of the mine. Thus, even if we do define rent net of depletion, Gray
reduces the depletion charge to well below the spot liquidation value of
the geological fund being depleted. In this he follows Bohm-Bawerk
(I, p. 335) and has been followed by Gaffriey (2, pp. 555—57).
   Although he would not deduct depletion from income, Gray would
let it retard output by adding it to marginal costs. He emphasizes that
on marginal land there is no depletion because there is no rent — and
depletion is simply discounted remote future rent.2 It might seem to
follow that extraction should proceed fastest on marginal land but
Gray, like all our contributors, says the opposite. There is no urgency
about using marginal ores that yield nothing above cost. But it is
urgent to use superior ore, because rent today is worth more than rent
that one must wait for. Our contributors agreed that the transcendent
fault of public policy today is failure to understand and follow this
principle spelled out by Gray many years ago.
  The higher the discount rate, and the longer the remaining life of a
mine, the less will depletion retard output.
  As to tax policy, Gray notes that a tax taking a fixed percentage of
the rent realized in any year would achieve intertemporal neutrality by
leaving undisturbed the ratios of rent-after-tax in every year. Un-
fortunately, he does not tell us how to handle time depreciation of
durable mine improvements in defining this tax base — a matter which
Professors Stephen McDonald and Henry Steele perceive as crucial,
and which has a central role in the editorial conclusion.
  Gray's work suffers from some other crudeness too. The use of partic-
ular arithmetic examples to demonstrate general propositions is danger-
ous; our contributors have remedied this. The dismissal of replacement
costs is unjustifiable as well as unnecessary. The coverage is limited.
And yet Gray manages in this remarkable little work to foreshadow
   2 He does not consider the dynamic case of land presently marginal but potentially

rent-yielding. If he had, it would strengthen his point. Herfindahl and the editor do
take this up in the present volume.
  6                                              Theoretical Foundation

many of the issues of this conference, to build an analytical foundation
consistent with the more polished ones presented at the symposium, to
link current with classical thinking, and to lead us toward policy con-
clusions consistent with what most conferees reached by more sophisti-
cated means.
                          Time in Economics
  This subject is usually called "capital theory," but the ineptitude
of that rubric is glaring in this symposium, where the subject is not
"capital" in the usual meaning, but natural resources. Whatever we
call it, it is clearly basic to any discussion of conservation; depletion,
and reserve-output ratios.
  Professor Anthony Scott, in Chapter 2 of this book, provides us with
a systematic theoretical framework for analysis of intertemporal econ-
omizing. Some of his findings might seem heretical against the back-
ground of the existing literature in the field, as he points out. But these
original contributions do not seem heretical in light of the symposium
discussions, and it may be he has timely captured "what oft was thought
but ne'er so well expressed."
  Professor Scott concludes that it is rational for us to use our best
natural opportunities first, "reducing quickly the amount of natural
capital he [a miner] has tied up in illiquid form." This passage nicely
epitomizes the attitude to "conservation" prevailing among the con-
ferees. It contrasts sharply with the Pavlovian protest against depletion
that not long ago dominated conservationist thought, and with many
prevailing policies that force us to use marginal resources while superior
ores are held in reserve.
  Professor Scott finds that the optimal rate of output is a balance be-
tween time preference — as represented by interest and other carrying
costs — and increasing costs that attend acceleration of the rate of pro-
duction. This follows Gray's earlier reasoning, but Scott generalizes the
principle far beyond Gray's vulnerable arithmetic example.
  Scott's heresy, which appears unexceptionable, is that the rational
mine manager will tilt his production plan in favor of the present
instead of producing at a constant annual rate. He will do this because
of the ever-shortening future life of the mine, even in the absence of
conditions such as deterioration of ore quality, or falling prices, or
rising costs. This is because of the rising value of what Professor Scott
calls the user cost of mining as exhaustion shortens the future life of
a mine.
INTRODUCTION                                                                       7

  Using a homely analogy, Scott's principle might be paraphrased as
follows: the toothpaste which I squeeze from the tube tonight does not
sacrifice tomorrow night's supply. Rather, I roll up the end of the tube
(which represents the future date of exhaustion) and bring tomorrow
night's supply to the orifice (which represents the present). What I
sacrifice is the toothpaste supply of the year of exhaustion, and the
user cost properly accounted tonight is that future value discounted
back over the life of the toothpaste tube. If the life is thirty or forty
years the discount factor is high and the proper user cost is correspond-
ingly low.
  The principle of rising user cost must be modified to fit the more
common condition that a mine dwindles out gradually as costs rise
over time. But Professor Scott's point is that such rise of costs is not the
only, or even a necessary, reason for tilt of production rates. Even if
quality and location of ore were constant until the hour of complete
exhaustion, as with the toothpaste, user cost would rise steadily (expo-
nentially) as future life shortened.
  In addition to these primary points, Professor Scott systematically
elaborates the behavior of a rational miner under a wide range of as-
sumed conditions.
  Dr. Orris Herfindahi addresses his analysis to extractive industry as
a whole rather than the individual firm that Scott treats; and to the
very long run — so long a run, indeed, that he takes as his unit of time
the life of a mine.
  Like Scott, Herfindahl gives the central role in his analysis to the net
return imputable to the natural resource input, but where Scott labels
this "profit," Herfindahl prefers "royalty."3 Both authors postulate
maximizing the present value of expected future net rents (or profits or
royalties) as the proper rule of conduct, both individual and social.
  In Scott's model, increasing cost of output is the effective constraint
  8 It should be obvious that the editor has not succeeded in imposing uniform ter-
minology on the contributors. If he had, it would be "rent." Herfindahl's definition
of "royalty" is the price of the metal in the ground. This is not to be confused with
Alfred Marshall's use of the term, as criticized by Gray. Marshall's "royalty" is the
same as Scott's "user cost." Scott's "profit" is gross of his "user cost" — a usage con-
sistent with Gray's insistence that "rent" is gross of Marshall's "royalty." Herfindahi
points his analysis to a longer run than Scott or Gray, and his choice of "royalty"
for economic rent may intimate an implicit asumption that mine rent, in part at
least, answers the description of Marshall's "royalty" (Scott's "user cost") — a deple-
tion fund to finance replacement via prospecting. McDonald and Steele share Her-
findahl's emphasis on prospecting and replacement.
  8                                                 Theoretical Foundation

on unlimited immediate withdrawals. In Herfindahi's model it is ex-
pected rising prices that serve this role, but Herfindahl does not foresee
future shortages and higher prices of raw materials. On the contrary,
he sees future cost reductions bringing into the market large supplies
from low-grade ores now submarginal. When he postulates rising prices
of the royalty they result from lower costs, not higher prices of raw
materials.
  That forecast presumably applies primarily to ores now submarginal
and as yet undeveloped. Ores already worked with capital committed
to older techniques would not share fully, if at all, in new techniques
reducing costs. Output of these ores would not be limited by anticipated
rising royalty values, but only by short-run increasing costs as described
by Scott.4
  With these differences of coverage, Herfindahl's findings are harmoni-
ous with Scott's. Use the best ores first: a major goal of conservation
policy should be to convert illiquid surpluses to earning assets. Her-
findahi elaborates this theme: the higher the royalty value, the more
should output be accelerated. "If demand is greater, shouldn'tuse be
shifted from present to future in the sense of extending the period of
exploration? The answer is No. . . . urgent demands as expressed by
the demand increase are urgent now as well as in the future. . . . The
better deposits will be exploited first. . . . The productive services
saved while using the better deposits can be put to work producing either
capital or consumer goods."
  This basic position of Herfindahl's harmonizes with that of Gray. In
Gray's example it is a higher price of the product in both present and
future that increases the rent, cost remaining fixed. As Gray puts it, the
extra future rent does not fully offset the extra present rent, because
the future rent must be waited for and its discounted present value is
less than the undiscounted value of its present alternative. Therefore,
anything raising the rent of mines by a given absolute amount in both
present and future makes present withdrawal more attractive relative
to future. The absolute excess of the present net rent over the present
value of its future alternative rises, thus accelerating present output.
  Herfindahl puts the case more generally than Gray. In effect, he tells
   Indeed some ores presently superior but undeveloped may be made obsolete
and devalued by cost reductions. This is the present fate of hematite, due to the
higher quality of pellets produced from taconite beneficiation, according to Dr.
Clarence Nelson of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.   -
INTRODUCTION                                                                      9

us, the ratio of future to present royalties must always be such as to
yield the going rate of interest.5 He notes various leverage factors at
work on royalty values. For example, a price rise, as in Gray's example,
with costs unchanged, raises present royalties, R0, by a larger percentage
than it raises future ones, R, since the future ones already had to be
larger to pay interest on R0 over t years. Herfindahl points out that a
given rise of prices causes a faster rise of royalties because of the leverage
of fixed costs. So prices need not rise as fast as the rate of interest to
make royalties rise at that rate, and warrant deferral of output.
   Herfindahi, like Gray, notes the intertemporal neutrality of a tax
based on the net royalty value, because it would maintain a constant
ratio between royalties in different years.6 Taxes based on gross output,
or on inputs, lack this quality but apply leverage that changes inter-
temporal choices. Professor William Vickrey, in Chapter 14 of this book,
shares that conclusion.
  In the large view, Herfindahl emphasizes the similarity of mineral
industries to other industries. He recognizes that depletion will over-
take individual ore deposits, but he stresses that progressive cost reduc-
tions continually bring submarginal ores into economic use so that in
the aggregate there is hardly any social depletion. If one takes the firm
or the industry rather than a piece of land as his basic unit, ores may
be regarded as a revolving inventory continually renewed by a combina-
tion of discovery and cost reduction and public works and human
migration. Thus, the firm is an earthworm moving slowly through
limitless resources, with an inventory of digestible resources moving
through the worm. This picture of the relations of economic man to
natural resources makes ore reserves an inventory —differing, however

   That is, where r
                         r R 1!
                         I   It —1
                   L Ro J
            r(P_c)1!
  6That is, I    '            r(P_c)(l-r)1!
                    I t — I = I          I t —1
             L("0 — C0)j                L("o — C0)(l_r)J
where P = Price of a unit of ore in the indicated year
      C = Cost of removing the unit
      t=Anyyear
      r = Rate of tax
Those equations assume that the site has no reuse value. If it does, the rate of return
(X) on holding ore falls to:

                              [(Pt_ct)+s1I
                             L (P0 — C0) + SJ
where S is site value. Now a neutral tax must also hit S.
  10                                             Theoretical Foundation

from other kinds of inventories in the long period between discovery
and consumption.
                   A General Control Model
  Rounding out the theory section is an original exploration by Dr.
John Hogan into the possible use of dynamic programming to optimize
tax policy over time. Sympathetically reviewing the literature, Dr.
Hogan notes the serious limitations of classical-type models which are
forced into unrealistic simplifying assumptions, and retreat into ceteris
paribus, because pre-computer man could not juggle many variables
simultaneously. Hogan would like to introduce more realistic con-
siderations of imperfect competition, for example, and he points to
the many feedbacks ignored in classical-type models. He then sketches
out for us the rudiments of a general control model along modem lines.
  The potential value of Hogan's approach may be appreciated by
comparing the various contributions to this symposium, which differ
from one another in what each writer chooses to hold constant, or
assume away.
  Hogan's sophisticated and challenging contribution is especially re-
freshing in considerations of tax policy where policy-makers have as-
sumed for years that guidelines should not rise too far above the level
of sloganeering. Hogan would apply modern computer theory and
technique to a set of issues ridden by tradition and subrational pres-
sures. It would be interesting to see how the computer's findings might
be translated for political consumption. As we go to press, Hogan and
Dr. Joseph Midler (RAND Corporation) are attempting to fit real-world
cost and revenue data to the control model described in this symposium,
so the time for actual application may arrive sooner than we think.


                               References
 1 Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk, Positive Theory of Capital, Vol. II of Capital
  and Interest, South Holland, Illinois: Libertarian Press, 1959.
2 Mason Gaffney, "Soil Depletion and Land Rent," Natural Resources Jour-
  nal, 4 (January 1965), 537—57.
  Joint Association Survey, Estimated Expenditures and Receipts of U.S. Oil
  and Gas Producing Industry, 1960, sponsored by the American Petroleum
  Institute, Independent Petroleum Association of America, and Midconti-
  nental Oil and Gas Association, December 1962. Cited in Alfred E. Kahn,
  "The Depletion Allowance in the Context of Cartelization," American
  Economic Review,     (June 1964), 286—314.
