         Editor's Conclusion
          MASON GAFFNEY




                  Contributions of the Symposium
Matters of Consensus
  An editor assumes some risk in declaring a consensus, since his inter-
pretation of others is fallible. But if there was not unanimity on the
following points, there was wide support for them and no contradiction.
The degree of consensus was a delightful surprise to all concerned, since
they were prepared for some battles, which turned into revival meetings.
The discovery of consensus is always useful. It builds an advanced base
from which further progress is possible.
  1. Exhaustible resources should not be exempt from the rule of
consumer sovereignty. No one questioned the propriety of discounting
future values at a market-determined rate of interest, and requiring
that postponement of use should yield a market rate of interest. There
was little or no Malthusian anxiety expressed, but a general recognition
of excess capacity. There was concern over the overuse of resources
without tenure protection, but this was concern over the errors of man,
not the stinginess of Nature.
   Everyone agreed that market interest rates should guide iñtertem-
poral conservation decisions. Some would deny any meaningful differ-
ences between investments in natural and man-made assets. Others,
while agreeing that postponement of use should yield a return like any
other investment, were interested in pursuing differences in effects on
unemployment, etc. Some conferees were skeptical that the structure of
interest rates is a good expression of consumer sovereignty over intertem
  334                                               Editor's Conclusion

poral choices, since interest rates are socially manipulated for macro-
economic ends. Other conferees emphasized credit rationing, and the
problem of selecting "the" market interest rate. These felt that the
issues of conservation and of concentration of economic power were
linked through the phenomenon of credit rationing.
   No one defended monopolization or cartelization to defer output for
conservation ends. Most conferees were critical of prevailing cartel
practices, from both a conservation and a distributive point of view.
No one advocated designing tax systems to defer output, although some
cautioned against taxes that might unduly accelerate output.
   The conferees' ideas of reform were premised on clearing away ob-
stacles to consumer sovereignty — obstacles such as uncertain tenure,
indivisibilities, taxes with deadweight excess burdens, state-enforced
prorate or allowable systems, imperfect market structures, and credit
rationing. Several wrote of the desirability of "internalizing exter-
nalities" or otherwise adjusting for external economies.
   The conferees regarded "efficiency" as an optimal balance among
several forces tugging in different directions. Efficient intertemporal
allocation was regarded as a compromise between interest costs urging
immediate use and several factors urging deferral, such as increasing
costs of accelerated extraction, rising future prices, and falling future
costs.
   2. Everyone agreed that the rational firm and economy should use
superior resources first, rather than hold them in reserve for the future.
Superior extractive resources are sterile surpluses which we should
liquidate and put to work earning interest. That does not represent a
blanket endorsement of all the barbarities and ravages committed in
the last two hundred years, but a more sympathetic understanding of
what needs doing now, and a remarkable reversal of the scolding atti-
tude that used to prevail among intellectual conservationists. Our con-
ferees were more inclined to scold institutions which prevent liquidation
of superior resources and thereby divert demand to premature scanning,
preempting and developing of marginal resources, freezing social capi-
tal instead of adding to it.
  .   Prevailing institutions have created an underused excess capacity
in many extractive industries. The capacity is excessively capital-inten-
sive; there is excessive lead-time between exploration investment and
liquidation as well as an excessive fixed capital in well and mine shafts,
etc. The capital is also excessively dispersed in space.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                         335

  Cartel systems tend to boomerang over a long period by stimulating
excess capacity. Ultimately this lowers prices, inflates costs, and at great
social cost dissipates a good deal of the potential economic rent which
the resources might yield. This pattern manifests itself in inordinately
high ratios of reserves and other durable assets to output and to labor
in mineral industries.
  4. The tax-paying capacity of mineral industries is considerable.
Some part of the income imputable to resources is pure rent over and
above replacement costs. This serves no useful economic function and
could be socialized through taxation or public ownership. However, the
issue is clouded by the uncertainties of exploration, and successful social-
ization of this rent would require methods of distinguishing functional
from non-functional income which are more advanced than we have
yet agreed on.
  Taxation may interfere with consumer sovereignty, but if skillfully
devised may raise revenue without so interfering. Some conferees
thought taxation might even be better than neutral, and positively abet
consumer sovereignty by helping offset antisocial market controls that
prevent early liquidation of sterile superior resources. Some conferees
felt that definition of net rent is the key to devising neutral or positive
taxation. Some others felt that net rent so discovered would constitute
a small revenue source and that a feasible alternative was the use of
broad-based wide-spectrum taxes which seek to achieve neutrality by
making tax avoidance impossible.
  5. Exploration is an important economic function and requires its
economic motivation. Few were satisfied that present institutional ar-
rangements do an adequate job of dispensing economic rewards so as
to stimulate optimum outlays, but we lacked time to discuss what
should be done.
  6. Concentrated ownership of mineral resources is an important lever
of market power in some industries. High reserve-output ratio is one
good index betraying the use of resource ownership to control markets.
Some conferees suggested the use of property taxation, based on the
assessed value of reserves, to encourage liquidation, subdivision, and
sale to weaken monopolies. Others were concerned with the effect of
such taxation on conservation, and regarded property taxation as a
minor anti-monopoly device.
  There was little reluctance on distributive grounds to tax natural
resources, as all conferees recognized that their ownership is highly
  336                                                  Editor's Conclusion

concentrated, particularly that of the superior resources. At the same
time it was recognized that small and marginal ownerships of certain
resources were widely diffused, and that this created strong political
support for state valorization policies, cartels, import barriers, tax privi-
leges, and other obstacles to economizing.
   7. Outright public ownership of subsurface resources, with leasing
to private operators, is a thinkable alternative within the framework of
private enterprise. Optimal leasing arrangements comprise a mixture
of payment methods that are analogous to the various standard alterna-
tive tax bases. Under public ownership government replaces the passive
landowner but not the producer, as, for example, in the offshore domain.
   But the alternative of public landownership, while thinkable, is not
necessarily better than asserting the public interest by taxation. There
are examples of frightful public mismanagement, and the choice would
hinge on particular circumstances.
Unresolved Issues and Research Needs
  A conference has its failures and omissions as well as its achievements
and coverage. It uncovers discord aswell as harmony, irresolution as well
as decision, ignorance and neglect as well as knowledge and attention.
But "sweet," quoth the Bard, "are the uses of adversity." Revealed weak-
nesses are also achievements, for they direct us to future work of the
highest urgency and supramarginal productivity. The following mat-
ters would repay our early attention:
   i. How may we most clearly distinguish functional from non-func-
tional income to owners of exhaustible resources which must be replaced
by exploration?
  2. We need a workable philosophy of transit between policies if
we are not to be perpetually bound by the careless errors of the past.
  .  We need to integrate conservation economics with macro-
economics. The symposium approach was almost entirely micro-eco-
nomic. It was virtually impossible to find economists to write on
macro-economic aspects of conservation.
 The present papers are, therefore, vulnerable to the criticism of sub-
optimization. They assume full employment and take as given the
market rate of interest. But there is unemployment, and interest rates
are socially manipulated to enhance employment. Our contributors
emphasize the similarity of investments in exhaustible resources and
other investments; but in macro-economics the latter are positive in-
MASON GAFFNEY

come-creating expenditures, while the former are not and even disem-
pioy labor by reducing the flow of raw materials to industry.
  Macro-economists for their part have ignored conservation. The
national income accounts do not recognize depletion. Business cycle
analysts have not adequately studied the cycles Of overexpansion and
collapse of cartels in extractive industries and their contribution to
overall economic instability. The development of excess capacity and
the slow growth of pressures to liquidate, which finally become irresisti-
ble, is a pattern that has all the elements of a cycle; and the synchroniza-
tion of several such cycles is an observable historical fact.
   Finally, it may be useful to integrate such cyclical analysis with the
problem of transition-making. After a system has collapsed and the value
of vested interests been deflated by the self-destructive machinations of
their very owners, reform should be a good deal easier.
   4. Tax capitalization was neglected. J. P. Jensen, in his classic work
on property taxation (24, Chap. 3), demonstrated that the capitalization
of property taxes on inexhaustible land would lower the price just
enough so that the combined burden of taxes and interest would be the
same with or without taxes. Capitalization of taxes on exhaustible re-
sources would not proceed that far, because of finite life expectancy; but
it would proceed quite far and modify generalizations which are made
about the effect of property taxes and other taxes on the rate of use.
   5. We need a consensus on the optimal balance of fiscal leverage and
fiscal risk-sharing. There are arguments for using some of each, but
the question of how much remains open. The case for fiscal leverage is
no doubt strongest where the relative importance of location in deter-
mining value is highest, because the importance of location is usually
a product of social investments whose costs are functions of time rather
than use. But this topic needs to be given some precision.
   6. The question of the neutrality of expensing capital outlays, while
raised at the conference, remains partly clouded. Does expensing achieve
tax neutrality by exempting the returns to capital and so limiting the
tax base to economic rent, as alleged by the editor; or because of its
being offered as a part of the broad-based value-added tax as maintained
by Professor McDonald; or as a partial step towards an expenditure tax
a la Irving Fisher, a position taken by Professor Vickrey in discussion?
   7. The definition and measurement of depletion remains a question.
Depletion is a decline in market value caused by use, but of what unit?
The unit of property whose value is in question is the decisive factor. If
  338                                                        Editor's Conclusion

the reserve-output ratio is large enough there is no material decline and
therefore no material depletion cost of use.
  Concepts of cost-recovery depletion and percentage depletion avoid
that problem but raise others and in general this topic cries out for
sharper analysis.
   8. We need attend more explicitly to the social efficiency of the appro-
priative principle as an economic motivation. In some manifestations,
like the rule of capture applied to underground poois, it obviously leads
to waste.
   In another manifestation the "rule of discovery" (finders keepers) sim-
ilarly leads to waste at a different level. The probable potential of gain
over costs from successful exploring in areas of supramarginal likelihood
of success (as appraised cx ante by explorers) is a fugacious opportunity
subject to preclusive capture by rivals. Is there a proper analogy between
that and the rule of capture applied to fishing, and oil pools, which
would create a systematic bias towards premature, excessive, and dupli-
cating exploration?
  In the absence of any tenure, clearly Yes, as is evident where prospec-
tors range and roam certain public lands open to mining claims by
anyone. Where explorers may buy exclusive lease rights to prospect
defined areas an optimal rate of exploratory effort might ensue, but no
one has ever proved it publicly; he would have to integrate production
economics with some probability analysis plus some study of landlord-
tenant relations, at least, and this under conditions of oligopsony with
imperfect and unequal knowledge. That is, a few oil companies know
more than the many lessors. At times, it must be that underpriced
leases are subject to a "rule of capture" as some majors snap up leases
to take — in that wonderfully revealing phrase of industry baffiegab —
"a defensive position," i.e., to get in before those other fellows do. The
other fellows are their fellow oligopsonists, better financed and informed
than the splintered lessors.
   Oil and mining firms rank at the top of any list of firms in assets per
employee 1_ a fact which is not inconsistent with a hypothesis that our
  'See Fortune (13, p. 251). The ten highest are Coastal States Gas, Amerada, Ten-
nessee Gas, Commonwealth Oil, Tidewater Oil, Sunray DX Oil, Union Oil, Marathon
Oil, Skelly Oil and Gulf Oil. The figures are inaccurate because asset values are not
reported at current levels in many cases. However, that makes it the more striking
that natural resource companies head the list, because it is natural resources whose
value most tends to be understated by carrying real estate on the books at historical
cost. Just for example, Weyerhaeuser's .6 million acres of woodlands is estimated
 MASON GAFFNEY                                                                339

institutions force them to devote excessive resources to advance search-
ing for reserves. There is great need to test that hypothesis and evaluate
its consequences.
   9. We need to evaluate a reverse kind of bias which discourages ade-
quate exploration in areas where the surface property has been sub-
divided. Because our law ties together surface and underground rights
unless explicitly' divided, the successful prospector on subdivided land
cannot 'capture most of the value of his discovery, which underlies the
lands of others. That undermotivates him.
   While this bias is a reverse of the previous one, it is not ideally counter-
vailing. In particular,' it biases exploration away from closely settled
areas, contributing (along with several other factors) to the extreme
geographic dispersion of extractive industry, and the needless transpor-
tation costs thereby imposed.
   So we need research in the motivation of exploration and how' it
might be improved.
   10. We need a better idea of where we are now in the pattern of long
swings of overexpansion and collapse which have characterized extrac-
tive industries. The present growth of secondary recovery, and the rising
pressures to raise property taxes, hint at growing pressures to liquidate.
But economic forecasters have shown little interest in how that might
bear on aggregate conditions.
   ii. We need more analysis of probability and uncertainty, especially
in the prospecting process.
   12. We need to begin to school ourselves in the arts of workable inter-
national cooperation through international administration of exhausti-
ble ocean resources — fish and minerals, primarily. Currently oceanic
tenure conditions are underdeveloped, a condition that leads to prema-
ture exploration and claim-staking —a kind of de facto principle of
prior appropriation prevails.2 Not only is that uneconomic; it poses
continual threats of international conflict.
to be worth 2 billion dollars, or 20 times its book value of loo million dollars. For
that and related information see Merrill Lynch et al., Natural Resources and the
Investor (p).
   'The Geneva Convention of 1958 would extend the territorial jurisdiction of
riparian nations out beyond the three-mile limit to a depth of 200 meters (650 feet)
(3). On this basis the North Sea nations can divide it up. However, the Convention
has not been universally ratified. The nation that establishes de facto occupation of
its zone by early production, therefore, has a clear advantage. In a modified sense,
open tenure still prevails, putting a premium on early occupation.
  340                                                 Editor's Conclusion

  Treaties are a possible way out. Conventions are better. A more ambi-
tious approach is modeled on the thirteen American colonies which
quitclaimed their overlapping western land grants to the new federal
government of the United States. The nations today might quitclaim
their offshore lands beyond the three-mile limit to the United Na-
tions. Whether we want the United Nations to have its own revenues and
whether it could administer its watery domain, are interesting ques-
tions — the ones we need to explore.

                          Editorial Findings
  One of the delights of study is observing one's position evolve as it
comes into conflict with the facts. Editorship accelerates the evolution.
The editor receives stimuli not only from facts forced upon his unwill-
ing, preconditioned mind, but also from the keen, informed minds of
fourteen assertive contributors. Those stimuli interact with his own
prior notions to generate some new insights and conjectures that seem
worth recording here. These are the editor's individual conclusions,
carefully sealed off from earlier materials which reflect his responsibility
to the contributors. The following are entirely the personal conclusions
of the editor, inspired by the editing itself. For an overview, I begin with
an analytical outline.
            Analytical Outline of Editorial Conclusions
                                                                      Page
The Analysis of Time-Indivisibility and the Recovery
over Time of Durable Investments                                       342
1 Yearly depletion from staggered mines is equivalent
  to losing one whole mine.                 -                          343
2 Reserve-output ratio (R: 0) is not determined by
  discoveries but by rate of recovery.                                 347
3 Rate of recovery is determined by maximizing
  present value (PV).                                                  348
4 Changing the reserve-output ratio (R:O) is slow,
  especially when it is long to begin with.                            353
5 A firm's reserves may have zero marginal value.                      355
6 Reserves for amortization double as cushions.                        356
7 Time-indivisibility and staggering multiply optimal
  firm size and jeopardize market freedom.                              358
MASON GAFFNEY                                                     341

 8 Either the operating or the ownership unit may be used
   to assess the value of depletion for income-tax deduction.      361
 9 A tax on mineral rents may be made neutral as to discovery
   as well as conservation.                                        364
Policy Conclusions                                                 367
 i Beyond neutrality.                                              367
 2 Marginal resources and neutrality.                              367
 3 Property taxes and depletion.                                   369
 4 Countervailing taxation.                                        371
 5 Property taxes and prospecting.                                 372
 6 Transit to higher taxes.                                        373
 7 Taxation to motivate exploration.                               374
 8 When to explore (and three misleading analogies).               381
   a Prospecting is not entirely analogous to other production.    383
   b The margin of mining is not analogous to the margin of
        "cultivation" (or other production) of a flow resource.    386
   c Mineral reserves are not analogous to inventories.            388
 9 How we overmotivate exploration.                                391
   a Open access.                                                  391
   b Preclusion and market power.                                  393
   c Duplication.                                                  394
   d Prorationing and the price umbrella.                          395
   e Prorationing and inflexibility of production.                 395
   f Leverage of private over public investment.                   395
   g Publicity and promotion.                                      396
   h Management aggrandizement.                                    397
   i Tax favors.                                                   37
io How to tax mineral rents.                                       399
   a The income tax with expensing of non-land outlays.            400
   b The property tax modified to exempt improvements.             402
   c Government ownership.                                         408
11 The share of rent.                                              409
12 An overview.                                                    413
Envoi                                                              416
  Readers who are impatient with models and theory should turn di-
rectly to policy conclusions (pp. 367—4 16).
  342                                                 Editor's Conclusion

The Analysis of Time-Indivisibility and the Recovery
over Time of Durable Investments
   A major need so far unsatisfied by this volume is an analytical appa-
ratus to cope with the treatment of durable capital and exploratory out-
lays (and their recovery with interest) in the definition of net in situ
mineral rent. The following pages (342—67) undertake to fill the need.
Then we can specify the tax treatment of durable capital outlays (in-
cluding exploratory outlays) that the norm of tax neutrality requires.
En route we gain new insights into the meaning of "reserves"; determine
the optimal life of mines; define depletion under conditions of stagger-
ing; analyze the process of changing the reserve-output ratio (R: 0);
explore the function of reserves for amortization and for cushioning;
and lay out the major economies of scale in mining, social and antisocial.
 • Mineral reserves have been likened to inventories, but the analogy is
far from perfect. Minerals are neither discovered nor removed in one-
year bundles. The conventional term "fund resource" is partly at fault:
it is disarmingly persuasive in its simplicity and familiarity. But an in-
finite fund is the same as a flow, and a sixty-year fund is not very differ-
ent. Only mines near exhaustion are really much like simple warehouses.
    In fact, most mines share the traits of funds with those of land. Like
other land, they are "indivisible in time."
    But that consideration opens up a whole set of questions we have
been glossing over. Mineral reserves are not like stockpiles of canned
goods, whose liquidation rate may rise or fall easily and reversibly;
which may be shipped from glutted stores to empty ones. Mineral
deposits take several years to recover; they are tied to specific outlets in
the form of capital improvements on a site; and the outlets are irreversi-
ble once built. One of an owner's mines plays out while others have
years of life remaining, yet he cannot shift reserves from one to another
any more than a local draft board that runs out of bachelors can call
up those in other jurisdictions. So the possession of fifty years' reserves
may not stop an immediate drop in output — reserves are non-poolable
and so is capacity to mine them. If a miner decides to change his reserve-
output ratio, it probably involves changing the use-rates of several stag-
gered mines over their whole lives, and takes several years to con-
summate.
  Under staggering by a going concern "reserves equal to n years'
output" or "n years' reserves" is an ambiguous concept, a point the
MASON GAFF NEY                                                     343

literature on mineral reserves neglects to clarify. Suppose an owner has
40 mines of years' future life (YFL) ranging from i to 40 and staggered
evenly — i.e., with one mine of each age from 1 to 40. The mean years'
reserves is o; but the first mine stops this year and the last goes on 40
years. Therefore, the "20 years' reserve" could not maintain the present
rate of output for o years, but only one; nor will it be completely
exhausted in 20 years, but 40. The owners have a limited choice of the
time distribution of future withdrawal.
   In order to check and expand our previous conclusions, which by
and large have avoided conscious recognition of this aspect of the ques-
tion, let us lay out a basic analytical apparatus and vocabulary needed
to cope with the economic relationships that would obtain in a simple
model of mining with discoveries and production decisions being "indi-
visible in time," and the miner staggering his mines to smooth out the
bumps. We need to modify the simpler model in a number of ways. We
will see that the basic ideas already developed still hold but can be
perceived more precisely and realistically and satisfyingly. As a major
gain, we will be much better able to deal with the deduction of capital
outlays for tax purposes. The added complexity is a small price for the
added realism and reduced vagueness which we will gain. Vagueness,
which leaves the inquiring mind groping for order, is the worst com-
plexity of all.
  Begin by postulating a simple going-concern model wherein an owner
has 40 identical mines, each of 40 years' whole life. For simplicity, each
yields a constant physical quantity at constant current cost until it
abruptly stops yielding. The owner has them evenly staggered, with one
mine of each YFL from i to 40. Each year he closes one exhausted mine
and opens a new one. The mean YFL is the half life of the representative
mine, 20 years; and that is also the reserve-output ratio (R:O).
  How does that staggered model differ from a simpler but unrealistic
inventory-analogy model in which an owner has 40 even-aged mines,
each with 20 years' reserves, which reserves are replenished yearly by
new discoveries for use in year 20? Let us enumerate the important
traits of the staggered model and explore their implications.
   i. Yearly depletion from staggered mines is equivalent to losing one
whole mine.
   Each year an old mine closes and a new one opens. The new one
replaces much more than the final unit taken from the closing mine.
It also replaces the units taken in the year from each of the several
  344                                                 Editor's Conclusion

mines: the 4oth year of future life from the mine opened last year, the
39th from the next one, and so on back to the second year of future
life from the mine to be retired next year.
   Thus, under perfect staggering, where each mine has the same original
life (40 years), the new mine exactly replaces the sum of the losses from
the 40 operating mines, not just in quantity but in time distribution
and therefore in present value. Putting it the other way, one year's deple-
tion or user cost from 40 staggered mines is the same as the loss of one
complete new mine.
   Thus, if an owner or an industry or a nation has 20 years' reserves,
replacing one year's use is not finding one full year's supply to use in
year 20, but a mine or mines of 40-year life to go on stream immediately.
   The above confirms the concept advanced earlier that depletion is
the yearly decline of present value, and that that decline (Scott's user
cost) is of lesser amount when reserves are longer. The staggered model
and the inventory-analogue model are both of balanced going concerns
wherein an owner maintains a constant reserve by replacing used
reserves yearly. In the inventory analogue he replaces reserves with 40
units to be used in year 20. In the staggered model he replaces with
40 units in a single mine to be used in years i to 40, the mean year
being the half life, 20. In either case the year's depletion cost equals the
value of its replacement. It is encouraging when the pieces of intricate
puzzles fall together in the pleasing, symmetrical, internally consistent
way that marks correct solutions.
  However, the staggered model also modifies the inventory analogue.
The values involved are moderately different. The loss of one year's
use from each of 40 staggered mines is similar to losing the 20th year
from 40 mines, since the half life (20) is the mean life. But actually the
value of the staggered depletion is moderately higher, because of dis-
counting. To confirm our intuition, let us show the analysis.
  Under perfect staggering, the user cost in one year is moderately
higher than if the same volume of ore were withdrawn from even-aged
mines of the same total reserves. The user cost of 40 perfectly stag-
gered mines is the same as the loss of one complete new mine of 40 YFL.
                           u= 1_(j_j_j)_40                              (1)
That, in turn, is higher than the user cost of 40 even-aged mines of 20
years each:
MASON GAFFNEY                                                      345

                       1 — (i   + j)_40                                 (2)
The truth of (2) may be demonstrated from the interest tables, at 5 per
cent:
                          17.2 >4°X .38= 15.2
                          17.2 > 15.2
  More generally, it is geometrically obvious from a graph (Fig. C.i)
showing the present value of one dollar in any year. The yearly usei
cost of 40 mines of staggered YFL is the area under the solid curve from

Present
 Value
  ($)
        .90

        .80

        .70

        .60

        • 50


        .40

        .30

        .20

        .10


                   5       tO       15    20   25    30     35     40
                         YEARS OF FUTURE LIFE (L)
                                  FIGURE C.1
Present Value of Depletion, Comparing 40 Staggered Mines and 40 Even-aged
                     Mines of the Same Total Reserves
  346                                                 Editor's Conclusion

o to 40. The yearly user cost of 40 even-aged mines of 20 YFL is the
area under the horizontal dash curve from o to 40. The former is larger,
since the area A > B. That is due to the downward convexity of the
solid curve, and holds generally for all values of L. For low values of
L the difference nearly vanishes.
   The fact that the difference is small is more striking than that there
is a difference at all, and is of practical importance to tax policy. It
means that we can treat 40 staggered mines of 40-year life as though
they were one large unit of 20-year life and emerge with virtually the
same value for the depletion allowance. We can pool reserves for tax
purposes without distorting matters seriously. Thus the Treasury can,
if necessary, treat large, vertically integrated firms as tax units for com-
puting depletion, and at the same time treat owners of single independ-
ent mines as units, without introducing any inequity between them
except a progressive element so minor as to be if anything too small
to serve the needs of equity and workable competition.
   The need for doing that emerges clearly in the case where large firms
hold idle discovered or semi-discovered reserves attached to rio shaft.
To maximize depletion allowances they might deliberately detach
reserves from operating units that way. The Treasury's best move is then
to pooi the firm's owned reserves for computing depletion values, a
matter we return to later.
  That slightly moderates, without basically changing, the principle
that firms with longer reserves should charge less per physical unit of
depletion than firms with shorter reserves.
  A second moderate difference between staggered and even-aged re-
serves is that the staggered ones are worth a little less. The present value
of 4° mines of staggered YFL from i to 40 is slightly less than the present
value of 40 mines of 20 YFL. The point is geometrically obvious from
a graph (Fig. C.2) showing the present value of a one-dollar annuity as
the life increases from i to 40.
  The value of 40 mines of staggered YFL is the area under the solid
curve from a to 40. The value of 40 even-aged mines of 20 YFL is the
area under the horizontal dash curve from 0 to 40. The former is obvi-
ously somewhat smaller, since the area A > B. It is due to the upward
convexity of the curve and holds generally for all values of L. For low
values of L the difference nearly vanishes. As a numerical example, at
6 per cent the 40 mines of 20 YFL are worth $460, while 40 staggered
mines are worth $413.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                       347

  2. Reserve-output ratio (R:O) is not determined by discoveries but
by rate of recovery.
  The process of lengthening reserves is not the same under the inven-
tory analogue and the staggered model. In the first, one would simply

Present
 Value
    ($)



          15




          10




           5




                   5      10     15     20     25     30     35 40
                               YEARS OF FUTURE LIFE (L)
                                FIGURE C.2
  Present Value of Mines, Comparing 40 Staggered Mines and o Even-aged
                    Mines of the Same Total Reserves

devote more effort to discovery and, in addition to replacing the 20th
YFL, add a 21st. In the second, discovery above replacement would not
much increase R: 0 because the extra new mine discovered would go
right into use and add to output as well as reserves.
   The staggered miner therefore does not control his R:0 by finding
more or less new deposits, nor by deferring the first use of current finds.
The key decision rather is the rate of use of deposits once found. That,
in turn, is determined by the size of the investment when a mine is new.
   348                                                     Editor's Conclusion

It is true the rate of use is subject to some short-run control, particularly
under monopoly or a cartel with the force of state law at its disposal.
But the primary real cost determinant (that which would prevail in
a free market) is the capacity built into the original basic mine shaft and
other durable capital improvements in year zero.
   So basic to our subject is this irreversible opening move in mine
use that it will pay us to spell out the factors that control it.
   3. Rate of recovery is determined by maximizing present value.
  We have moved well beyond the basic perception of conservation
economics, that one holds a "unit" of ore so long as it appreciates faster
than the interest rate. Units of ore are not available individually. They
are indivisibly linked in a mine, an integrated recovery operation over
time, which itself may be staggered as part of a larger going concern.
The key decision determining R: 0 and thus the value of new mines,
and of depletion, it seems now is the decision that determines the life
of a mine.
   Rarely, that might be outside man's control. Nature might have a
bottleneck limiting how fast man may recover a deposit. But usually
the main bottleneck is the capacity man builds. The miner can enlarge,
duplicate and quadruplicate any given size and number of adits, shafts,
or other works. The owner who carries long reserves does so by choice.3
Let us consider the determinants of the choice.
  The simple rule for determining mine life is maximization of present
value. This is one of the few cases in economics where the present value
rule is applicable in its simplest form: because there is normally no
reuse value of the site to consider, but only a single time horizon; and
the key decision is indeed to be made• in time zero, the "present" at
which value is to be maximized. To be sure, secondary recovery under
improved technique often constitutes a second.generation use beyond
the simple primary time horizon, one which might prompt one to
shorten the first cycle if it interfered with the second. But let some
later toiler refine that point, which need not divert us now.
   I will proceed by showing a priori how the present values of revenues
and cost vary with life.
   Revenues first. Suppose a deposit contains a recoverable amount A,
independent of life L. Yearly revenue is A/L: as one doubles life he
         choice is sometimes socially imposed by prorate. The present point is that
the choice is under human control.
MASON GAFF NEY                                                             349

halves yearly revenue. The present value gradually falls from an (un-
attainable) maximum of A, as A is broken into smaller parts and pushed
farther into the future.4 Present value of revenues (PVR) is the yearly
revenue annuity times the present value formula:

                                                                             ()
  Plotting the log of L horizontally, PVR describes a curve starting like
a flat hilltop, sloping down to the right, and flattening out again in a
valley, like the right half of a bell or an inverted S, with a point of
inflection (B on Fig. C.3).

Present
 Value



         .8
                                                 r -.08L-L
                                           PVB. 1=          1.08
                                                 L
         .6

         .4

         .z

          0                                                                      L
              0   1.   2      3            5     6      7          8   9

                                  DB
                                  FIGURE C.3
Present Values of Revenues (PVR) and of Costs (PVC) as Planned Life (L) of a
                         Mineral Deposit Increases

  The simplifying assumption that recoverable mineral (A) is inde-
pendent of life (L) would often not hold strictly. Changes in A would
modify the PVR curve in detail but not violate its general contour. Just
how A varie5 with life is too involved an empirical question to settle
here. A may tend to decline as life lengthens because shorter life requires
more shafts, etc., giving better overall access. On the other hand, slower
recovery of oil may let pressure sweep the matrix cleaner, as in McDon-

    Professor McDonald in Chapter i i of this book suggests part of the framework
of this model. See also the model developed by McDonald with James McKie (ix,
pp. 101—10).
  350                                                       Editor's Conclusion

aid's model in this book. The issue merits another book.5 Here we
skirt it by assuming A constant as life varies.5
  At i =8 per cent, the point of inflection (B) comes between L = 16
and L = 32. The number of years is an important datum, because visual
inspection of Figure C.3 suggests it is probable (although not certain)
that optimal life (D) precedes the point of inflection.
  The present value of costs (PVC) involves less discounting, because
most costs are incurred in year zero as capital outlay. PVC falls as
life lengthens because less capacity is required.
  Beginning from a short life of say four years, doubling life should
cut costs almost in half because half the capacity is required. The ca-
pacity for fast recovery in only four years would probably entail parallel,
duplicating shafts or other capital units, and one would simply elimi.
nate half of them for a life of eight years.
  But as life lengthens, doubling, it from say i6 to 32 years will not
halve PVC. For as capacity falls, one meets three basic diseconóinies:
  First, dropping capacity means not just fewer shafts but smaller ones,
                                                               -.
losing economies of scale.
  Second, adding longevity begins to cost something after a point. A
shaft to last io years may cost only io per cent more than one to last
years, a difference so small that probably no reader winced at my opening
allegation that doubling life halves the cost of capacity. But capital does
wear out, especially the moving parts, and .a 4o.year shaft might cost 50
per cent more than a 2o-year shaft of the same capacity — especially if
we include in the symbolic term "shaft" the associated pumps, excava-
tors, stripper shovels, shafts, rails, hoses, and other obviously depreciable
elements involved. Longevity, like everything, comes at a cost; and
adding 20 years is likely to add more to cost than 5 years.
  The cost may take the form of higher initial capital cost ofthe more
durable facility; of outright replacement before the end of the 40-year
   A standard criterion used in state regulation is the Maximum Efficient Rate
(MER), which is defined as the rate maximizing "ultimate recovery," i.e., maximizing
our A, which is presumed to rise with life. MER is without economic content. Even
with zero interest, it would never make sense to maximize ultimate recovery. MER
serves mainly to lend some aura of "engineering" authority and "conservation"
ideology to cartei restrictions. The lengths to which restriction has gone are mani-
fest in the rarity of prorate boards' letting producers go as high as MER.
  0
         illuminating discussion of the question in oil fields is found in McKie and
McDonald 01). Accelerating output from given wells may reduce ultimate recovery,
while adding wells may let one accelerate without such loss.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                351

program of recovery; or of higher variable costs in later years; and most
likely a mixture of all three forms. In any case, the extra years of life
will tend to come at a higher added cost; and it takes more and more
additional years to halve the capacity required.
  Combining the two points above, a 4o-year shaft may be regarded as
two 20-year shafts teamed in series rather than in parallel. The cost
saving is from the method of teaming: economies of longevity are
greater than economies of scale. But as longevity rises and scale falls
there remain few gains of longevity to achieve, and the miner begins to
lose economies of scale.
   Third, as the number of shafts falls the cost of transporting material
from its locus to the shaft rises, increasing operating costs.7 This con-
straint is related to the loss of scale with added longevity. One might
overcome the loss of scale by adding more reserves behind a mine. But
that meets added internal costs of moving materials over more distance.
   Remember, too; that discovery cost may for many purposes be in-
cluded among capital costs; and they are a constant, not falling with
life (L).
   The PVC curve in Figure C.3 assumes the profile of a scoop snow-
shovel or half-U or a ski-slope, concave upwards and to the right. It falls
steeply at first and then flattens out. It would flatten out even if doubling
life continued to halve costs indefinitely. But it flattens out sooner be-
cause of the three rising costs of longevity.
   Maximum net present value of the deposit, which is optimal planned
life, is life D in Figure C.3, where the two curves are parallel and their
vertical difference is a maximum.8
   From the shapes of the curves it seems most likely that, if they are
   The increased costs may take, among others, the form of reduced ultimate
recovery, but this is not strictly admissible because I have postulated a simplifying
assumption that total removal, A, is not -affected by rate of removal.
   8
         highest possible value of D may be estimated by simple calculation. The
highest possible value is that which would obtain if there were no diseconomies of
longevity, so doubling L always halved PVC. Let K be the PVC if L = i. D is then
found by maximizing
                                As—(I+i) K
                                L       i         L
By differentiation, that is when

The right side is a ratio and the left side is a function of L easy to tabulate from
standard tables. For example, at 8 per cent, if = 14, L = so years.
  352                                                 Editor's Conclusion

goingto cross at all, the maximum net PV will come before B, the point
of inflection in PVR. That is not conclusive, but it gives us some a priori
cause for viewing with suspicion any firm holding enough reserves
behind an individual mine to keep it going for 50 years, or any "con-
servationist" laws requiring it to do so. At 8 per cent the point of in-
flection comes at about L = 24.
   If optimal life were at B, 24 years, the half-life would be 12, and that
would be the R:O. That is an exceedingly rough figure, of course, but
it suggests what short reserves it might be optimal to maintain.
   Not all firms will arrive at the same optimal life. Stronger-financed
firms, with lower internal interest rates, will find maximum PV(R—C)
at longer planned lives than will firms of weaker financial position. In
Figure C.3, at lower discount rates, the hillside-shaped curve of PVR
slopes down less steeply, moving maximum PV(R—C) to the right. Thus
the stronger firms arrive at higher R:O. It is an industry truism that
weaker firms are more concerned with rate of recovery, and stronger
firms with holding reserves.
   It might seem a paradox that the better-financed miner, who has the
wherewithal to invest great capital in mine improvements for quick
recovery, should be more inclined toward slow recovery. But it is simply
the old familiar economic paradox of comparative advantage. In this
case the analogy fits. His relative strength compared to less affluent
owners — the thing at which he is not just better but "more better" — is
in holding assets for future liquidation. The advantage of a lower inter-
nal firm interest rate grows with the futurity of the assets being pur-
chased. For example, comparing internal rates of 5 per cent and 6- per
cent, the lower i lets one bid i per cent more today for $ioo due next
year, but 6o per cent more for $ioo due in 50 years ($8.72 VS. $5.42).
   So the advantage of financial strength, expressed in a lower internal
i, motivates the strong to substitute more for less longevous assets. In
mining that means substituting mineral reserves for mine improve-
ments. So the owner with abundant capital at his disposal will not tend
to favor heavy investment in mine improvements. These usually have
shorter lives than mineral deposits; they also shorten the lives of deposits
by speeding recovery. He will tend to hold back on improvements and
instead acquire more reserves, by purchase or discovery, for future slow
recovery.
  The slow miner is the economic counterpart of the farm or city land-
owner who combines land with less capital and payroll than others, not
MASON GAFF NEY                                                       353

because he loves capital less, but land more. There is a marginal rate of
substitution between land of high longevity and capital of lower lon-
gevity, and his finances prompt him to substitute land for capital. So
he does not use his land resources as intensively as others of weaker
finances. He has the money to improve any given acre more than others
can, but he generally prefers to acquire more land instead.
   In the inventory-analogue model, it is not clear that the possession
of longer reserves implies slower present use of any given deposit. In
the present time-indivisibility model it is clear, because to defer the
liquidation of future reserves entails slower use from the start. The
entire recovery program is an indivisible unit over time — units of ore
line up behind and march through a capacity choke in measured
cadence. In this model the key decisions in mining are seen as being
more like key decisions in other land use.
   This land-use analogy is not perfect either, because of the exhausti-
bility factor. Rather, mineral deposits uniquely combine some land-like
qualities and some inventory-like qualities. The curves in Figure C.3,
properly interpreted, should convey the unique economics of mineral
exploitation without wholly accepting or rejecting either analogy.
   4. Changing reserve-output ratio (R:O) is slow, especially when it is
long to begin with.
   Another distinctive feature of the staggered model is the lag it implies
in adjustment to new conditions. If interest rates fall, prescribing longer
lives and higher R:O, the miner's primary adjustment is building less
capacity and longer life into new mines. The life of old ones is largely
determined by the original capacity, which is not reviewable until the
new replaces the old. It takes mining longer to respond to new economic
stimuli, therefore, than it takes the new stimuli to be replaced by still
newer ones, so the industry is chronically maladjusted, lagging its times
by many years.
   It is not really staggering as such, but time-indivisibility, that causes
the lag. If we had 40 even-aged mines of 20-year life we could not adjust
any mine at all, except one year in 20 when we could change every one.
Staggering merely spreads this problem evenly so that each year we can
make some change.
   Staggered or not, a longer life of mines means a longer lag in adjusting
to changed parameters. Oil reserves queued up behind shafts of low
capacity are by no means on tap to meet emergency needs, either for
minerals in particular or capital in general. Today interest rates stand
  354                                                Editor's Conclusion

double what they were fifteen and twenty years ago. Many mines and
wells producing today are geared to that slower pace. The owners cannot
benefit from earlier recovery of their money, and needy borrowers can-
not benefit from the additional funds thus released.
   The comforting thought that long reserves give us great flexibility
to meet contingencies we must partly abandon, therefore. There is some
short-run flexibility in each given mine, but it is not increased by having
longer reserves behind each mine. Most of the adjustment occurs in the
new mine opened yearly.
   This adjustment is in fact slowed by longer reserves. With 40-year life
of the representative staggered mine, and one mine turnover yearly, we
retire and replace i /40 of our output yearly and complete the change-
over in 40 years, by which time, no doubt, new adjustments will be long
overdue. With 20-year life it takes 20 years, and so on. With the shorter
life, and still 40 mines, we must now retire two yearly; or we could get
along on fewer mines (and somewhat larger jolts to our going concern).
But no matter; in either case a shorter initial life means faster turnover
and faster response to new economic stimuli.
   The adjustment from longer to shorter reserves may be rapid if we
drop the assumption that each producing mine finish out its preordained
life cycle before replacement. An owner with very long reserves behind
his mines in effect has completely idle, uncommitted reserves which he
can bring to life quickly. An 80-year reserve behind one mine, for
example, is more like one 40-year reserve and one idle deposit, and this
owner can double output by throwing the uncommitted 40-year units
into the breach. Forty years is long enough to exhaust most economies
of longevity, in mine capital. He simply needs to duplicate existing
capital' and double output.
  Thus a firm of high R:O can break the pattern of perfect staggering
and by an energetic wrench increase output promptly. Anaconda Cop-
per, which has 40 per cent of world copper reserves compared to less
than 14 per cent of the output, is currently investing heavily in new
mine improvements to raise output by 50 per cent from existing reserves
()  — simple enough when your R:O is more than four times the rest
of the .industry's. But that is better conceived as putting idle reserves
to use than as shortening a systematic pattern of staggering. In the
absence of idle reserves, a faster turnover clearly accelerates change, and
thus substitutes for holding sterile reserves. A high turnover firm or
MASON GAFFNEY                                                           355

industry achieves its adaptability by subjecting a high percentage of
its production to redesign each year, a procedure which achieves the
end without the high social cost of idle reserves.
  The adaptable firm also needs to be able to reduce output quickly
in response to lower prices. A firm needs no advance reserves to do that;
but the shorter reserves it has, the higher percentage of its capacity it
retires each year. Furthermore, mines of few years of future life (YFL)
can economically be turned on and off in response to changing relations
of present to future prices. A small price advantage is enough to warrant
substituting near-future production for present production. With Ion-
gevous mines, on the other hand, sacrifice of present production adds
nothing to near-future production, but only to remote future production
whose present value is too low to be worth much present sacrifice.
  The adaptable firm also needs to guard against obsolescence. Here
again a short life of mine and a high replacement factor each year is the
best policy.
  5. A firm's reserves may have zero marginal value.
  All the above is hidden from us when we regard reserves as simple
inventories. In the inventory-analogy model, the reason for holding
long reserves is left to the imagination, but presumably is to absorb
economic shocks, like any inventory. In the staggered model, with time-
indivisibility, the function of reserves is seen in a different light: it is to
amortize the capital in heavy initial mine improvements. (And at one
remove in mills and refineries, although that is a debatable point in each
case depending on how tightly they are integrated.)
  In the example above (p. 54), where 8o-year reserves were converted
to 40-year reserves by doubling capacity and output, we saw that the
second 4o-year unit had been effectively idle. Its contribution to amor-
tization was negligible, so it could be fructified immediately at no in-
crease of unit costs.
   Generalizing that, we can say that any firm (or other unit of interest)
that can increase output from owned reserves at no increase of unit costs
has been treating its reserves like free goods, goods of no scarcity value
whatever. That firm is analogous to the farm landowner who has com-
bined his labor and equipment with so much land that added land
brings no net increase of output. It is a basic principle of production
economics that at the low intensity of land use at which the elasticity
of production response to non-land inputs equals unity (that is, where
  356                                                Editor's Conclusion

their marginal product equals their average product, and a i per cent
increase of these inputs yields a i per cent increase of output), the
marginal return to additional land is zero.
  The farmer in question has no productive reason to spend anything
for more land. The mineowner has no business spending another nickel
acquiring more reserves, whether by purchase or exploration. His
treatment of present reserves indicates they have a zero value to him.
   Here, the indivisibility-in.time model gives an insight that was ob-
scured in the inventory analogue, because the former is more enlight-
ening about the primary function of advance reserves in mining. A miner
might rationally hold a reserve for use after 40 to 8o years if he believes
its value in situ will rise yearly by more than the interest rate. But he
cannot be assumed to believe this if he is busy mining identical or
inferior ores now. It is highly suspect if others are mining inferior ores
now, and empirical studies given and cited in this volume tell us that
is a common state of affairs. So he lacks a legitimate speculative (or con-
servationist— it is much the same) motive as well as a productive motive.
That begins to cut it down to unworthy purposes such as market con-
trol, price maintenance, preclusive aggrandizement, perpetuation of
management, premature acquisitiveness under conditions of imperfect
tenure, etc.
   Here we must beware of drawing easy inferences from available data
on reserves, for these data are sometimes based on physical mineral units
and "grades" without due regard for other value factors such as location
or cost of extraction. We cannot assume them "identical" with ores
presently "being mined" (i.e., planned for removal by existing capital
capacity) simply because they are of the same geological "grade." But
the criterion holds as stated initially: a firm that can increase output
from owned reserves at no increase of unit costs has no business acquiring
more reserves, except for antisocial ends.
   Turning the statement around, this same firm has no business claim-
ing any depletion when it uses ore. For what has it lost by use? — a re-
source whose lack of legitimate value to the firm is revealed by the
owner's non-use. More generally, the longer reserves a firm holds the
less is the warranted outlay on replacement and the less the warranted
depletion charge — the two are roughly equal. I later recommend let-
ting depletion charges decline as R:O rises.
   6. Reserves for amortization double as cushions.
   Staggering of mines achieves a smooth yearly flow of discovery effort
MASON GAFFNEY                                                        357

(the input) and recovery of mineral (the output). Discovery and recovery
occur concurrently. One of the perennial fallacies of capital theory is
that this concurrence somehow erases the lapse of time between the
input and the resulting output —that they become simultaneous, and
the capital-output ratio is independent of the time lapse between input
and output.
  In fact, it should be abundantly obvious that a longer waiting period
means more reserves on hand at any time for a given output. If we halve
the life of 40 mines from 40 years each to 20, we double output from
the same reserves, thereby halving R: 0.
  Thus, staggering does not mean we are operating without reserves.
However, there is a question whether reserves which are primarily com-
mitted to amortization can also serve the other function of reserves, as
economic shock absorbers. Or do we need additional reserves to cushion
against a long dearth of new discoveries or a surge of demand?
  Reserves committed to amortization can be useful as cushions in a
number of ways: (a) They permit short-run increase of output from
fixed capacity, albeit at rising marginal cost. (Under the allowable
system this advantage is lost to the individual, but retained by the state
and magnified by excess capacity.) (b) The longest reserves, behind the
newest mines, can be quickly mobilized by adding capacity. A rise of
price would make some of this adjustment economical. (c) The longer
reserves are, when they are staggered, the smaller percentage of capacity
is lost yearly by retirements, and the easier it is to compensate for a dry
prospecting year.
   Thus, time-indivisibility does not completely commit and immobilize
reserves, nor destroy their value as cushions. It does restrict their
mobility greatly, so we cannot say all reserves serve the second, or cush-
ioning, function at no cost to the first, or amortizing, function. But if
the amortizing function calls for 20-year reserves, it seems a fair guess
in most cases that that would afford enough slack so the owner would
secure the benefits of the cushioning function virtually free as a by-
product. Common sense suggests that a good manager should be able to
wring at little cost enough flexibility from 20-year amortizing reserves to
equal at least two or three years' worth of pure uncommitted reserves.
Other stages of production somehow struggle along and make do with
much less than that.
  And so it is doubtful that owners hold idle reserves in any volume
for this cushioning function. Dual-purpose reserves, primarily corn-
  358                                                 Editor's Conclusion

mitted to amortization, afford free as much cushion as is likely to be
needed.
  There is a very important exception to that rule, however, in an
industry such, as oil, where the states control monthly output under the
allowable system. That takes away the owner's option of advancing use
dates from heavier use of existing capacity.
   The prorate allowable system prevents owners' using their reserves
as reserves to the extent that it prevents their advancing use dates at will.
A control system based on the well unit would, to be sure, permit of
parallel wells; but a many-acre spacing requirement might prevent
much real double-tapping of given resources.
  In the last case, the owner cannot count on his 40-year well as a
reserve for early contingencies. The monthly flow is rigidly fixed by law.
That might force owners to hold some deposits completely idle as
reserves to throw into a breach when demand surged or current dis-
coveries lagged. It magnifies the aggregate reserves miners must hold.
  When we add this to its other sins, the allowable system is a remark-
able device for inflating capital requirements and driving small busi-
ness out of oil. For a given flow of oil it requires one to have (a) more
wells; (b) longer reserves under each well; (c) a larger overall operation,
to achieve staggering with longer reserves; and now (d) some idle re-
serves to use as operating cushions, or operational inventories. This all
adds up to an invidious prohibition on entry and survival aimed against
those who lack long reserves of assets to hold in cold storage.
  7. Time-indivisibility and staggering multiply optimal firm size and
jeopardize market freedom.
  The staggered model gives added insight into economies of scale in
mining, and the market structure that tends to develop around them.
  An owner seeking to achieve economies of longevity in mining a
given deposit tends to lose, as we have seen, economies of scale. To
achieve the first without losing the second he can, however, increase the
overall size of his reserve deposit, nature permitting and neighboring
owners willing. The minimum size of reserve necessary to achieve lon-
gevity and scale economies jointly is the lower limit on size of workable
deposit or ownership.
  As an owner increases his R:O by increasing the absolute amount of
reserves behind each mine, however, he meets another limit in the
dimension of space. Transportation of ore from its locus in matrix to
the mine shaft foot adds cost until a limit is reached. He may also meet
MASON GAFFNEY                                                    359

problems of land assembly when he tries to enlarge a unit. He may have
to spend more time setting up necessary pre-conditions for the optimal
unit than it is worth to achieve the optimum. Balancing out these major
factors, and several minor ones, he arrives at an optimal scale for
each mine.
  But now he must consider how many such mines to combine and
stagger in order to achieve the economies of constancy — the "going
concern" economies. It is here that his answer will be most affected by
market structure — and in turn affect it in a cumulative feedback pat-
tern, so that a small change in the independent determinants has mul-
tiple effects either way.
  If there is a free market in ores, an owner's need for staggering is
minimum. The market as a whole pools risks. A refinery may feed from
several sources.
   The mining firm needs steady work for exploring personnel and
equipment, as well as for miners. But it need not perform all its own
staggering by carrying the full ownership burden of the reserves re-
quired for a fully staggered cycle. It can sell excess new discoveries
to other firms, or do contract exploring for landowners and do no
mining at all. It can buy mines from others and work them. Capital
recovered from one mine may be invested in other businesses or any
generalized security, and new capital may be pulled in from the general
pooi. Miners may move from one firm to another; retiring miners may
go unreplaced, or net new ones be recruited. A family firm may exploit
one deposit only, keying its life to the life cycle of a work force, and
shunt recovered capital into other investments altogether. In a free
market the entire mining operation may be broken into hundreds of
small parts, coordinated and synchronized through the market mechan-
ism, and integrated with the rest of the economy.
  The owner who must do his own staggering is the one who operates
in unfree markets, and who must maintain the immortality of a "going
concern." He must control enough reserves to assure himself, from his
owned resources, his own steady supply. The surpluses of others are not
available to meet his shortages, but are simply sterile; while he must
carry enough fat to meet his own shortages and cannot rely on others
to relieve his gluts.
  The ownership unit in the absence of free markets must then be large
enough to achieve its own internal economies of staggering. It must in
effect be an entire industry in microcosm. The more insulated it is from
  360                                                       Editor's Conclusion

the rest of the world, and the more institutionalized, the fewer shocks
it can tolerate and the more perfectly staggered it must be.
  Now staggering increases the scale of ownership by a very large factor,
something like ten or twenty times. There are a number of unfortunate
effects;
  First, the number of potential entrants becomes very few as the aggre-
gate capital and size requirement rises. It is true, as shown in Figure C.2,
that staggering slightly lowers the present value of mines and so eases
the interest burden of holding reserves. But the effect is too small to
count for much. Staggered or not, the burden is staggering and enough
to drive large numbers of small owners out of mining, or into mergers.
   The capital requirement may speciously be lessened by the firm's
acquiring reserves by long-term contract rather than immediate out-
right purchase. The practice is common between gas transmission com-
panies and producers, for example. However, the practice implies high
faith by the seller in the buyer's credit rating and financial strength;
otherwise the seller is giving up his chance of later windfalls with no
corresponding protection against price drops. It is basically an exten-
sion of mortgage credit from seller to buyer, like sale of any real estate
by land contract. Like mortgage credit, contract sales are extended on
preferential or privileged terms to stronger buyers and contain the
same bias toward favoring larger over smaller firms.
  Second, the aggregate need for reserves rises because each firm must
have enough to achieve internally the pooling and smoothness that a
free market would provide externally. (I expand this point later under
"How We Overmotivate Exploration," pp. 394—95).
   Third, as each firm races for reserves in order to assure its survival it
removes reserves from the free market pool that might be available to
all and forces other firms to race too. "Racing" differs from competition
in the laudatory sense in that races end; and the premium is on jumping
the gun. (There are few rules in this race!) Racing bids up the price of
reserves and encourages speculative expectations of further price in-
creases as close control of reserves is seen as a likely prospect.9 The
    Even in a market ostensibly still partly open, crude oil, the importance of a
firm's own reserves is manifest in the common practice of bartering oil for oil (8,
p. 100). The practice of barter suggests a species of market limited in access to those
who already own crude reserves to barter. The common practice of "posting" prices
which are then undercut for buyers with bargaining power, like a make-or-buy option,
suggests the same kind of pattern.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                     361

financially weak (and numerically strong) release reserves to the strong
hands of giant majors, who can afford to speculate.'° Here is the cumula-
tive feedback process alluded to earlier: the expectation of reserves'
being cornered has qualities of the self-fulfilling prophecy. As the free
market begins to crumble the race accelerates to merge and achieve
economies internally by agglomerating reserves. After some critical point
the resulting chain reaction quickly leads to the destruction of an open
market in ores, and to universal vertical integration.
  Thus, time-indivisibility and staggering help lead to corporate giant-
ism11 and consequent loss of economic freedom. The remedies lie in
public policies making it costly to hold idle reserves, and so lowering the
life of mines; and in fostering free markets, for competition grows or
withers cumulatively by feedback, whereby small exogenous causes have
great effects.
  8. Either the operating or the ownership unit may be used to assess
the value of depletion for income tax deduction.
  Another contribution of the staggered model is to help in selecting
the proper unit for the purpose of putting a value on depletion. I agree
with Harold Hotelling that". . . the rate of decline in value of a mine
seems a logical quantity to define as depletion and to deduct from in-
come. . . ." (, p. 170). Scott's user cost involves the same idea.12 Use
  10
     As an example, the self-sufficiency ratios of oil refiners increase with size of the
refiner; i.e., the smaller refiners have to buy a larger share of their crude (De Chazeau
and Kahn [zo, p. s8j as cited in Paul Davidson [8, p. 98 n. 15fl. Think how relatively
much more self-sufficient the giant majors would appear if (a) state prorates let
them produce freely from the superior deposits they hold, and (b) they could import
freely from their immense foreign holdings. In fact, the majors are more than self-
sufficient. They sell crude to others.
   U When firms are ranked by assets rather than gross sales, Standard Oil of N.J.
outranks General Motors. Of the top eleven non-financial firms six are mineral firms:
Standard Oil of N.J., U.S. Steel, Texaco, Socony Mobil, Gulf Oil and Standard Oil
of California (12, p. 226). Conventional understatement of values of mineral reserves
acquired in the past tends to bias the ranking if at all against the mineral finns. For
example, among the holdings of Standard Oil of California are 102.9 million (sic)
net acres (about the area of California) of producing or prospective oil and gas land.
For complete data see Merrill Lynch et al. (32, P. '5). Fortune lists book value of
company assets at only 4.2 billion dollars.
   12 Bdhm-Bawerk also favored this concept. See his discussion of the quarry (i,
p. 335). For a similar position see Mason Gaffney (i8, pp. 555—57). Herbert Dorau has
worked on an unpublished theory of building depreciation premised on the same
fundamental notion. Michèle Consigny and I have developed and will soon publish
a depreciation formula for income taxation which would be neutral among different
lives, and it too entails this basic concept of depreciation.
  362                                               Editor's Conclusion

of this definition for income-tax purposes would result in higher taxes
on owners with longer reserves, leading toward subdivision, quicker
recovery, and interfirm equalization of R:O. Strong hands would
weaken and release idle reserves to financially weaker hands, and new
hands, accelerating recovery and whetting competition. Putting it more
fairly, it is the present approach to depletion, based on undiscounted
spot values, which grants the deduction to those whose mines are too
longevous to depreciate with use, which contains the non-neutral bias
towards slow recovery and monopoly.
  I will later conclude that the entire depletion approach to capital
recovery is a third choice, less desirable than either the expensing ap-
proach or best of all a modified property tax that exempts improve-
ments. However, so long as we do continue to favor the depletion
approach, it would be well worthwhile to modify it in line with Hotel-
ling's and Scott's definition of depletion. That poses a further problem
of identifying the unit of property the change in whose value is to be
counted as "depletion." This section addresses that problem.
   In most cases the mine operating unit does tolerably well as an iden-
tifiable entity. Thanks to indivisibility, and locational stability, most
reserves are unambiguously attached to a given "shaft," our symbolic
term for any large identifiable capital unit. When all reserves are at-
tached to some shaft — i.e., none are purely idle — this would be a
simple and adequate way to solve the problem of units. Operating R:O's
do not fail to reflect ownership conditions: owners with long owned
reserves and market power tend to tie longer reserves to each mine,
keying their operations to their strong financial circumstances. Use of
the operating unit basis, therefore, would accomplish the same ends as
use of the ownership unit. As to the problem of aggregation, we have
also seen that the sum of user costs from a set of staggered mines equals
the decline in value of the full ownership unit.
   However, the operating-unit basis leaves a loophole for income-tax
avoidance by letting firms detach some reserves from any shaft at all.
Thus they could magnify depletion allowances from producing shafts;
later they would tap the idle reserves with new shafts. This loophole is
a variant of the more general principle that any tax with a progressive
aspect may be reduced by subdividing the tax base. Real subdivision in
this case would not be objectionable — on the contrary. But holding idle
reserves would be factitious subdivision, of no redeeming social value.
   The solution is to require that the taxpayer assign all owned reserves
MASON GAFFNEY                                                       863

to some operating unit. Idle reserves, unreachable by existing shafts,
could be assigned to some mill or refinery, and its reserve position be
evaluated as a whole, even though the reserves were contained in several
separate mines and deposits. Or if necessary an entire firm could be
taken as the unit, its reserves being regarded as attached to its marketing
system.
   That means pooling the firm's reserves for tax purposes, and that in
turn means a minor legal fiction, because reserves from different mines
cannot in fact always be pooled. It means that a mine of 2 YFL would
get little depletion credit if pooled with other mines of 6o YFL, or with
idle reserves. The mine of 6o YFL, on the other hand, would get more
depletion at a rate based on the mean R:O.
   We have seen (Fig. C.i) that under perfect staggering such pooling
would slightly lower the value of the depletion allowance, even in the
absence of idle reserves. That is, the yearly decline in value of 40 mines
of 20 YFL is a trifle less than that of 4° mines of staggered YFL. But we
also saw that the difference is minimal. 'What difference there is works
in a progressive direction by lowering depletion allowances more for
larger firms, and might be desirable on grounds of distributive equity
and aid to competition. But the effect is minor, in any event.
   Administrators will make errors estimating life of mines, of course.
Owners will conceal reserves and plead exhaustion. But if the year of
alleged exhaustion arrives, and the mine produces unabated, there is a
remedy: no more depletion. The owner seeking to overstate depletion is
boxed between two limits. If he understates life he also must put a low
figure on the present value, which limits the total depletion he can
claim over life. If he claims a high value and long life, he must defer
depletion until later, and later it might not all be allowed when the
original overstatement becomes manifest. This information should also
be made available to state and local assessors for property-tax valuation.
  Thus, the tax collector is not a babe in the woods to be systematically
outthought by the owner. The owner has little room to maneuver be-
tween the walls of his box, and whether he succeeds in exaggerating or
understating his reserves, he has little to gain over making a correct
estimate. Simple errors, too, would be subject to renegotiation near the
end of life.
  As new reserves are continually discovered and added to the base,
there is scope for a good deal of tax evasion by understating the reserve
  364                                                        Editor's Conclusion

until other reserves are gone, and then revaluing it upwards. The remedy
here lies in subjecting the revaluation windfall to taxation.
  No doubt taxpayers will contrive other ingenious loopholes, as with
any tax with a progressive feature. Only the in rem ad valorem property
tax is invulnerable to that kind of maneuver. But. so long as we rely on
realized income as the tax base, and so long as we handle capital recovery
by the depletion approach, the suggestions above should give a tax
based on a true definition of resource income and with wholesome effects
on market structure.
   I later conclude, however, that we need to improve on the depletion
approach to capital recovery, which suffers from basic incurable faults.
   9. A tax on mineral rents may be made neutral as to discovery as well
as to conservation.
   Herfindahl and Vickrey have expounded the intertemporal neutrality
of a tax on net realized mineral rent. Their exposition has been in terms
of a net value above costs, where revenues and costs were assignable to
individual years. Steele has intimated the difficulties &f this concept
where heavy initial capital costs must be spread over many years, and
McDonald has brought out the central importance of the tax treatment
of capital investment.
   Figure C.3 above helps solve those difficulties. If a cycle of mineral
investment and recovery be evaluated as a whole, the optimal time-dis-
tribution maximizes present net value of the resource. A tax taking a
fixed percentage of the net would not change the life which yields maxi-
mum net present value, and so would be substantially neutral. Such a
tax might best be levied as an annuity whose PV equals the tax rate times
the PV of the mine, and whose life approximately equals the life of
the mine.13

  "Applying that to equation () and Figure C.3, the tax annuity would have the
value:
                           TA-i: — 0 _____
                           T                1 — (1 + j)_L                          (4)
where T is the yearly tax, t the tax rate. (Costs in years after o should be discounted
to time o and included in C0.)
    (s,) is derived by two steps: first, subtract C0 from (3), giving present value net
of capital costs; second, convert the lump sum to an annuity by multiplying by

                                                                            A
   (4) converts the lump sum P17 to an annual net rent, the cash flow _Z_less the
"capital recovery factor"              times capital cost. Note that the annuity
                               + j_L
    is
(.) not something to maximize by changing L. A higher annuity is possible by
MASON GAFFNEY                                                             365

   The neutrality of this tax extends further than its effect on the time-
distribution of use of the known stock. It is also neutral on the timing
of discovery and development. These two decisions are also critical in
their timing, and the criterion is the same as for conservation of the
known stock, to wit, maximization of present value (as of any given
year). That is, the time to begin developing a proven reserve is when
the value in situ stops rising faster than the interest rate, so its PV is a
maximum. Again, the time to begin prospecting lands with suspected
reserves is when their leasable value stops rising faster than the interest
rate. This is the same principle, but with discovery costs added to devel-
opment costs.
  This is an important extension of the principle of the neutrality of
proportional taxes on mineral rent. Not only do they not affect time-
distribution of use of the stock which is known and already tapped; not
only do they not affect the time of beginning the removal; but they also
leave unchanged the timing of discovery itself.
   There remains the possibility that they may reduce the optimal ex-
ploratory outlay, even while preserving the timing. But the presumption
of temporal neutrality is that discovery costs be fully deductible when
laid out — i.e., be expensed — either directly or by the device suggested
above of making the tax an annuity whose present value is the tax rate
times the PV of the mine. The same presumption preserves their
quantity. The quantity that maximizes rent before tax also maximizes
rent after tax.
  There are two ways to tax rent: the base may be realized rent, as with
an income tax that expenses capital outlays; or putative, assessed rent,
as with a property tax that exempts improvements. The suggested
annuity tax has features of both modes. It would let the federal income
tax take on a bit more of the character of a property tax, for the level
of the annuity, at least at the start, would have to be based on some sort
of advance appraisal of the mine. Later, like an income tax, it might be
readjusted to reflect experience with the mine.
  Another approach to taxation of mine rent is simply to allow full
deduction of all non-land costs, including capital outlays in full in the
year of outlay.14 The practical problem here is that, if the tax rate were
shortening L, but it would have a lower PV0 because of there being fewer total
annual payments.
  14
         Treasury thus lends the taxpayer a tax deferment that grows at compound
interest to equal the value of the taxes when due. See also McDonald's discussion
of expensing in Chapter ii of this book.
  66                                                 Editor's Conclusion

high, the government would first have to contribute a large share of the
initial capital investment, which would count as negative income in
year o; and later have to take a large share of gross income to recoup its
investment, impairing taxpayer incentives. At a ioo per cent rate the
government would supply the entire capital outlay and recover zoo per
cent of the later cash flow above current costs — if there were any. But
then why would a private investor care if there were or not? To avoid
such a problem, the annuity approach is better. Under this regime the
miner pays a steady constant yearly tax, a percentage of yearly rent, and
keeps everything above that to motivate him.
  In application, the annuity approach might give the income tax some
of the levering character of a property tax based on presumptive rather
than realized income. Constitutional lawyers may frown at such a use
of the Sixteenth Amendment, but waiters and gamblers are already
taxed on presumptive income and it might make more economic sense
to extend the precedent to landowners.
  As a final caution, note that the in situ income tax, as discussed here,
implies the absence of any depletion deduction. The taxpayer's capital
recovery is handled by setting his tax rate as though he were allowed to
expense capital outlays when incurred. Any depletion deduction above
that would be double counting and simply leave rent in private hands.
Depletion and expensing are substitute approaches to capital recovery,
not complements.
   The considerations of what unit to use to assess the value of depletion,
therefore, would apply only where expensing is not or has not been
allowed.
   As between the two approaches to capital recovery — expensing and
depletion — expensing (or its annuity equivalent) is more compatible
with the taxation of economic rent. Expensing real costs enables us to
distinguish between actual capital formation and lease acquisition.
Thirty years later the two kinds of outlays have merged into the market
value of a mine, and depletion is likely to cover both, without, however,
exempting from tax the interest return on productive outlays as ex-
pensing does.
  If we must use the depletion approach, then the methods suggested for
assessing the value of depletion for income tax deduction should be
useful. They might also have a place in a transition period. But on
balance the expensing approach with an annuity tax seems an interim
MASON GAFFNEY                                                       367

goal toward which to move; and a property tax based on an accurately
assessed putative value net of discovery costs seems an ultimate goal.

Policy Conclusions
   Forearmed with the formal analysis, we may now draw policy conclu-
sions and in a more relaxed and literary mood explore several points in
more depth. Like the points made above, these are individual conclu-
sions of the editor and do not purport to express any consensus among
the conferees. The editor acknowledges a deep debt to the contributors,
however. Their thinking and criticism improved his mind and directed
him to many of the issues whose significance he did not previously hold
in proper perspective. Correspondence from Professors Vickrey and
McDonald has been especially deep and provocative.
Beyond Neutrality. "Neutrality" is a good norm of tax policy, but not
the best. Some taxes may be better than neutral; that is, they may posi-
tively improve on the pre-tax allocation of resources by helping to make
imperfect markets less faulty, by countervailing biases that characterize
some markets, etc.
   For example, severance taxes might be used as price surrogates to limit
demands on open-access resources like fisheries. Conversely, taxes may
be used to improve access to or allocation of resources which the private
market has partially frozen or removed from commerce. Taxes on the
capability or rentability of land may tend to weaken monopoly. More
generally, they and other taxes on rent lower the financial requirements
for land acquisition, letting people pay for access to resources one year
at a time, instead of in one lump sum, thereby short-circuiting the other-
wise serious economic barrier of credit rationing. These taxes also may
stimulate economizing behavior by reducing the liquidity and the total
holdout power of sleeping landowners too affluent or diverted to be
concerned with making the most of the assets at their command. They
apply leverage, sharpening the incentives of the market and sharpening
the definition of maximum profit positions.
Marginal Resources and Neutrality. We may recognize neutral and
better taxes (given perfect tenure) by their lack of effect on marginal
resources, and marginal decisions on all resources. (In the absence of ten-
ure protection over resources, better-than-neutral taxes would be user
charges and would affect marginal decisions.) Taxes falling on the net
income or rent or value of resources meet that test, because on marginal
resources the tax base equals zero, and there is no tax, hence no destruc-
  368                                                         Editor's Conclusion

lion of marginal output. Tax bases other than natural resources gener-
ally lack this virtue because there is no free marginal supply. Taxes on
gross output lack this virtue because they hit producers on marginal
land. (I am indebted to David Ricardo for pointing this out a hundred
and fifty years ago in Chapters io and ii of his Principles.) Minnesota's
recent taconite amendment, for example, guaranteeing upper limits on
taxes on the production of taconite, was followed immediately by several
commitments to build new plants in northeastern Minnesota, a graphic
example of the impact of unneutral taxation on marginal decisions. Any
severance or excise or royalty or other tax based on gross output (or gross
input) will hit marginal land and render it submarginal.15
  Neutral and better taxes may be increased to per cent rates without
worsening allocation or incentives. That simple reductio ad absurdum
forces us to face up to distortions we are tempted to overlook as negli-
gible or undemonstrable when rates are very low. At per cent rates,
taxes on gross receipts or value added, for example, would close down
production completely.
  Taxes on the net income of extractive resources are better, but at
99 per cent would leave no effective incentive to realize the taxable
income. High rates would put a heavy premium on uses yielding untaxed
psychic income to the owner, so the tax is not really neutral. Unpleasant
extractive resources such as coal mines, that yield little psychic income,16
might be taxed effectively on the net money income. Similar taxes, how-
ever, on forests or fisheries or farms would motivate the owners to devote

    The profession proved remarkably perceptive of this point in its reaction to
one mistake in an otherwise excellent paper by Professor Paul Davidson. He analyzed
percentage depletion like a negative excise tax — a sound analogy — but then mini-
mized its influence on exploration and extension of the margin by saying the
emergence of rent on previously submarginal land would absorb all the surplus —
again correct—and thereby completely offset the incentive to develop new land.
The last is a basic error. New rent only absorbs the gain above Costs, it does not
prevent the outlay of the Costs themselves. Davidson's analysis would have made any
tax neutral by denying its effect on marginal lands and by implication on marginal
production on all lands. In fact, excise taxes on marginal lands make them sub-
marginal, and negative excises do the reverse. See Paul Davidson (8), and Campbell's
(7), Steele's (6), Comments" and Davidson's reply thereto (9); McDonald (30, p. iso,
n. '43); and A. E. Kahn (26). On p. io of his reply, Davidson seems to agree in
principle that a negative excise may encourage exploration. See also Allyn Lockner
(28).
   10 Masochistic personalities may get psychic relief from coal mining. They may even
enjoy paying taxes. I do not think, however, that most of us would prefer to live in
a society geared to their needs.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                    369

the entire resources to personal recreation and subsistence farming. Un-
taxed residential and recreational land use would be expanded, com-
mercial and industrial uses choked off. Trade and specialization would
give way to self-contained subsistence economies, and the Treasury
would be empty.
  In addition, any tax based on realized cash income invites deferment
of realization to defer tax liability, a form of tax avoidance that has be-
come so universal one might fairly call it the single most pronounced
allocative effect of income taxation.
   To avoid those problems at high tax rates we have to resort to a tax
based like the property tax on the assessed market value or "rentability"
of resources. Those elusive leprechauns called implicit, imputed,
psychic, and accrued undistributed income are firmly capitalized into
the price of land, and may be taxed through the traditional property-
tax mechanism. This tax may be better-than-neutral, as mentioned
above. Here, however, we meet the problem of exhaustibility.
Property Taxes and Depletion. Many suspect the property tax of
accelerating depletion because the taxpayer may reduce the tax base by
exhausting it. That effect is overstated in general, and is actually quite
weak for the following five reasons:
   1. Property taxes on land are capitalized into lower prices, so that
the yearly carrying costs are reduced. Where the future life of deposits
is very long, tax capitalization virtually eliminates any net influence
of taxes on output. The higher tax burden is offset by a lower burden of
interest (implicit or explicit).17
   2. Where a prorate or production allowable system controls permis-
sible output, as in most oil-producing regions, operators cannot acceler-
ate output to avoid taxes in any event. In the long run, heavy property
  11J. P. Jensen gives us an excellent treatment of tax capitalization in his Property
Taxation in the U. S. (24, Chap.   ). The "carrying cost" of a mine is V(i + t), where
V is present value, i is interest rate, and t is property tax rate. Putting the tax rate,
t, into the capitalization formula,
                               V—a ______________
                                           (i+t)
where a is annual net income, assumed constant over life, and L is life.
  Carrying cost (CC) then is:
                             CCa [1_(1+i+t)]
A rise of t does increase CC, but only slightly.
  For an analysis of tax capitalization under credit rationing see Daniel Holland
(22); Mason Gaffney (i6, pp. 282—84 especially); and (i7, pp. o, 49, 74—82).
   370                                                     Editor's Conclusion

taxes might create pressures to eliminate the prorate system, followed
by accelerated output from superior fields, but on balance that change
would work a great improvement over the present constipated condition.
   3. In practice, the effect on output of the property tax depends on the
assessor's method and the interplay between the assessor and the tax-
payer. It is likely that many assessors use a rule-of-thumb approach,
always assuming the same life of wells.18 If the assessor then takes the
initial production rate as typical over this fixed hypothetical life, he
would create a motive for producers to start off slowly. Even though
slower production defers realization of the owner's investment, it also
means lower taxes until the assessor revisits. It is only if the assessor
actually estimates life and then over time progressively lowers assess-
ments with reduced life expectancy that the property tax motivates
accelerated output.
   4. Much of the damage done by property taxation in fact is attribut-
able to the levy on mine improvements, as opposed to mines them-
selves — that is, the in situ value of the resource proper. A tax on mine
improvements motivates the miner to shorten the life of improvements,
probably substituting capacity for longevity. That is a fault of general
property taxation, but not of taxation on the capitalized net rentability
of mines per se.
  Even this fault is conditional. It depends on the assumption that
capital can shift the tax and maintain the same rate of return after
taxes as would obtain in the absence of taxes. If capital is unable to
shift, however — say because the tax is too widespread to avoid by mi-
grating — it must accept a lower rate of return after taxes, and the
original rate of return before taxes, leaving no residual effect on
longevity.
  A horseback method of separating improvements from in situ values
in present property taxation in the field is to distinguish between the
property tax on lessors and lessees. The tax on the lessee's property rep-
resents improvements plus discovery values resulting from successful
prospecting. A tax on in situ values would exempt the improvements
and some of the discovery value (although that question wants further
  18A. 0. Lockner writes of several states that base property-tax assessments on
production rather than on any effort at appraisal of productive capacity. To the
extent that that is common, practice, the property tax has become something like a
severance tax, tending to retard use (28, p. 468, n. 2).
MASON GAFFNEY                                                        371

analysis). The in situ tax would bear, therefore, more on the lessor's in-
terest; and lessors generally have little influence on rates of production.
  5. The possibility is remote that property taxes on in situ values
would lead to premature abandonment. Because the miner sinks his
capital in mine improvements, their existence causes him to continue
his tenure for some years after the mine has lost its rentability for im-
mediate reuse, and has therefore stopped paying the in situ tax. That is,
the fixed investment will cause him to work to a lower margin than it
would be profitable to work on a year-to-year basis. (There is also future
secondary recovery to anticipate, under improved future techniques;
that, too, discourages abandonment.)
   Under proper assessment of in situ taxes, therefore, mines in use under
fixed capital would become marginal — and the taxes zero — some years
before abandonment. Or, we might prefer an arrangement where taxes
would approach zero as abandonment approaches. In either case, no one
could avoid taxes by abandonment.
  Let us add that no one who supports percentage depletion should
be allowed to speak above a whisper in criticism of property taxation,
because percentage depletion tends to accelerate depletion more than
almost any other thinkable tax measure.
  Premature abandonment is more heavily encouraged by (a) severance
taxation and (b) the usual "sharecropping" arrangements between
lessee and lessor, than by property taxation. Those institutions take
a share of the lessee's gross and so make a mine submarginal to him be-
fore it is so in fact to society. That does not exonerate property taxation,
but it does suggest that much of the received literature, which singles
out the property tax for censure, is not well balanced.
  The allowable or prorate system would also cause premature aban-
donment by inflating well costs, were it not tempered by the exemption
of many older marginal wells from the prorate.
Countervailing Taxation. In spite of the above, there remains some
tendency for property taxes on in situ values to accelerate depletion.
This tendency can be offset, if desired, by a perfectly countervailing
tax on depletion (on Scott's user cost). By that device any desired per-
centage of the rent may be socialized without excess burden either in
the form of accelerated or retarded depletion. The taxes simply replace
certain prices and costs in the economy of the producer. The property
tax replaces interest (explicit or implicit), and the depletion tax replaces
   372                                                       Editor's Conclusion

private user cost. In either case, socialization may be partial or total, as
desired. The two kinds of charges together exhaust the rent.19
   Such a tax couplet would shift over time as life expectancy shortens,
from primary emphasis on the property-tax component, the function of
time, to primary emphasis on the depletion charge, a function of use.
It shouldn't be a difficult trick to combine the two charges in such a
way as optimally to constrain and motivate the operator of a mine. The
suggested tax couplet is an alternative to the neutral annuity tax pro-
posed above (pp. 364—67) and not a supplement. But the two approaches
might be used simultaneously by different taxing authorities, provided
the two together did not absorb more than the full tax base.
   In fact, it is likely that the mild purgative effect of the property tax
is in practice more than offset by the drop in the effective discount rate
occasioned by general taxation of capital and its income in all industries
and jurisdictions. The discount rate is the most powerful determinant
of rates of use, and if this is artificially dropped, by a system of taxes
that lowers the overall rate of return after taxes on new investments, the
tax system as a whole operates to retard depletion of superior ores.
Property Taxes and Prospecting. Property taxes also draw fire for dis-
couraging prospecting. Any tax, indeed, that cuts into the net income
from minerals may tend to lower their present value before use, and
thereby demotivate prospecting. We have seen the income tax may be
exonerated by expensing exploration outlays. But property taxes may
also be exonerated. They possess a unique virtue in this regard which
has received little of the credit it probably deserves; to wit, they may
be and sometimes are imposed before discovery as well as after.
   From the fact that rents, royalties, bonuses, and "points" to passive
landowners loom so large in prospecting outlays, we know that some
lands have a high probability of responding favorably to exploration.
  1For simplicity, assume a mine which yields a steady rent for L years and stops
abruptly. Carrying costs (interest and property taxes) on the capitalized value of
each dollar of rent are equal to:
                           (i+t) I_(1±i±t)
Depletion under our assumptions is equal to:
                                    (1+i+t)_L
The sum of carrying costs and depletion is, therefore, equal to 1. That is the entire
rent (23, p. 170).
   Adding a tax on depletion will complicate the above expression but without
changing the basic principle that carrying costs plus depletion exhaust the rent in-
come.
MASON GAFF NEY                                                                 73
This probability passes frequently through the market, which evaluates
it.20 Appraisal consulting finns, such as De Golyer and MacNaughton of
Dallas, specialize in valuing such probabilities. Business can be con-
ducted on such appraisals; so can taxation. If assessors followed the rule
of ad valorem uniformity, it automatically would be.
   Pre-discovery property taxation motivates landowners to lease their
mineral rights, or prospect themselves, to the end either of dispelling
the illusion and lowering their assessment, or confinning it and starting
production. There is even a danger of overmotivating prospecting by
injudicious application of the principle. Here we need not lay out the
precise requirements of striking an optimal balance. Suffice it that taxa-
tion may accelerate as well as retard exploration, and we need not leave
mineral rents in private hands on the illusion that there is no other way
to motivate exploration. Comparing property taxes and percentage
depletion the latter encourages exploration by giving away tax revenues;
the former by raising them.
  We return to this matter in the discussion of taxation to motivate
exploration.
Transit to Higher Taxes. A transition to higher taxes on mines may
not be as difficult as at first glance it appears. It is possible without over-
accelerating depletion, by adopting a transitional policy of countervail-
ing taxation which will retard depletion by the same amount that
the anticipation of higher future taxes accelerates depletion.
  In many jurisdictions we already have a set of tax and prorate and
cartel policies which retard depletion, so such countervailing institu-
tions already exist and the anticipation of higher future taxes would
move us toward optimality when it accelerated depletion above present
rates. Severance taxes and excises are heavily retarding. Even a tax on
net income acts like a gross-receipts tax after the date of heavy capital
investments.21 So, in the absence of precision-planned countervailing
taxes, we may still feel some assurance that accelerating depletion would
improve the general welfare in jurisdictions with such taxes.
  Percentage depletion, on the other hand, tends to accelerate depletion
   °Lessees generally obtain oil leases after geological and geophysical evaluation.
In Alberta they are even allowed some core and exploratory drilling before bidding
for leases. Market values are not established entirely in the dark.
     Landlord-lessee relationships may also retard recovery. Much of the landlord's
rent comes in the form of a royalty fixed at a share of gross, customarily I/ but often
more. It affects the lessee's motives somewhat as a 12½ per cent or more severance
tax would.
   374                                                        Editor's Conclusion

heavily and would do so even more if its withdrawal were imminent.
But its production effects are already held in check by the allowable
system. It would be a matter of timing to repeal the allowance first,
and then lift the prorates. The worst that could happen, however, is
not a wholesale waste of resources as some may envision. Accelerating
production, should that occur, would quickly bring spot prices down
very low, motivating most resource owners to hold out for a rise.22 Rather
than suffer such a redistribution of income, industry leaders and state
agencies would probably prefer to cooperate in effecting an orderly
transition to higher taxes and freer markets. They of all people have
nothing to gain by suddenly flooding the market. Only we should
beware the strategy that would release chaos to induce trauma and so
win support for a return to their leadership and control.
Taxation to Motivate Exploration. If it is possible to frame tax laws
that will capture mine rent without jeopardizing economical conserva-
tion of the known stock, is it also possible to capture the rent without
demotivating replacement by exploration? As taxes drain the value from
resources, do people lose an adequate profit motive to hunt for more?
How much profit motive is adequate?
   I suggested above how the property tax may be modified so as to
encourage exploration. I briefly suggested as well a method of taking
a percentage of rent net of discovery costs, a method that could be sub-
stantially neutral if administratively feasible. The brief abstract analysis
(pp. 364—67) raises as many questions as it answers. Here let us bring
it down to earth with reference to going institutions and in confronta-
tion with other ideas.
   It is possible to tax mineral rents without diluting the motive to
explore. The following devices would work, some better than others.
   1. Under the property tax, we may assess and tax the pre-discovery
value of unexplored land with good mineral prospects. These values are
    The force of this point is evident in the Persian Gulf, where foreign firms hold
concessions of limited life. Aramco concessions in Saudi Arabia, for example, terminate
in 1999 and 2005. Whydoes the company not loot the reserves while it can? A primary
concern with price effects would seem to be the answer —exploiting consumers is
more lucrative than exploiting resources. See Wayne Leeman (27, pp. i68, 225, Chaps.
2, 6, et passim).
   There remains a remote danger of chaotic collapse of dimensions that would cause
lenders and credit to shrink from the industry, encouraging widespread liquidation.
With most reserves being held by some of the strongest financial powers in the world,
that seems an improbable outcome.
MASON GArFNEY                                                      375

measurable in the market for leases giving exploration rights. Such
taxation of leasability value not only permits exploration, 'it forces it,
and in some anti-commercial cultures might be the best way to open
lands for prospecting. As to public lands, we may lease them to explorers,
with much of the payment being an annual fixed charge until such time
as the lessees begin producing and paying royalties. This 'would have
the same effect as annual ad valorem taxation of privately held lands.
In either case, the landowner would accelerate exploration,' either to
find minerals or to lower taxes by establishing the absence of minerals.
   "Discovery" is not usually a single dramatic revelation, but a slow
accretion of evidence. Most reserves are chronically in a half-discovered
condition. Nothing could accelerate further probing quite so much as
a fixed steady charge on the market value of the title to these'thadowy
treasures.
   Then, after discovery, of course, we could continue to tax rent without
the tax's having risen as the result of discovery. Thus we would not
discourage exploration. The trick would be to collect about the same
amount from all lands after exploration as before, only after exploration
the taxes would be concentrated on the rich lands and removed from
those proven poor. A simple ad valorem approach tends to' bring that
result.
   2. Under the income tax, we may allow expensing of exploration
outlays (other than lease acquisition). Indeed, we already 'do 'so in
large part. This practice in effect exempts from the tax that part of
gross income imputable to the expensed outlays for exploration. Its
rationale is similar to that of the annuity tax on rents. The higher the
tax rate on mineral rents, under this system, the higher the public con-
tribution to exploration.
   The neutrality of expensing capital investments in mineral develop-
ment of course presupposes similar treatment of capital investments in
other stages of production (which means in other industries,, also). In
the absence of general expensing for all taxpayers, it would be more
neutral to let mineral investments be capitalized and depreciated over
life, like other investments. However, such general income taxation
imposes severe intertemporal biases, the topic that Professor McDonald
has opened. The virtue of general expensing is that it comes close to
converting the corporate income tax into a tax on pure economic rent,
thus assuring its neutrality and stimulating productive investments by
exempting their income from taxation.
  376                                                         Editor's Conclusion

  .  Under  the income tax, we may allow a depletion write-off from
taxable income, but nothing like the present system.
   Depletion is the decline in value of a, resource due to extracting part
of it. It is usually much less than the spot liquidation value of the unit
extracted, because depletion is a loss of remote future value. To define
depletion as the spot value, and then deduct it from taxable income,
is virtually to exempt the rent of mines from income taxes. To define
depletion in terms of welihead value as today we do, is to exempt more
than the rent of mines (a subsidy which inures to mineowners because
it is given only to outlays used in connection with mining). Mining and
oil company publicity releases often urge just that; but depletion, prop-
erly defined, does not approach spot liquidation value until ultimate
exhaustion is imminent, and never approaches wellhead value unless
production costs approach zero.
   But an economic allowance based as Hotelling recommends on the
actual drop in value caused by use (Scott's user cost) would supply
enough to replace the used mineral, including lease costs, which are
price-determined rents. We might choose to leave such an amount in pri-
vate hands.
   The motive to reinvest this amount in minerals exploration would
be weakened by taxing rent (net of user cost), which would take a bite
of the interest on the investment in discovery value. To be sure, the
actual exploration outlay for superior resources is less than their dis-
covery value. This fact is expressed in lease prices charged to explorers
by passive landowners, which absorb the difference. Expectation of
taxes on post-discovery rents lowers lease prices, preserving part of the
net income of the actual explorer. But on marginal land there is no
cushion of surplus to absorb the loss.
  This approach fails to pass the test of zero taxation on marginal
land. Defining marginal land as that on which discovery values equal
discovery costs (and use begins on date of discovery), the taxpayer would
eventually recover his discovery costs tax free, but would pay a tax
on the income they generated.23 Such a tax is "neutral" only on
the unreal assumption that because taxation is general capital cannot
shift part of the tax. But it does, by emigrating, lowering its rate of
    Davidson interpreted the provision for percentage depletion, which lets a miner
recover more than the original cost of discovery, development, and lease purchase, as
simply adding to rents. But in fact it would also lower taxes on marginal land and
expand exploration, as his critics brought out. See also note 15, above.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                    377

turnover,24 and moving into durable consumer goods. Thus the tax
makes marginal land become submarginal.
  At the same time that the depletion approach taxes the income of
productive investment on marginal land (and all land), it lets some
economic rent escape from superior land. For the miner recovers not just
his productive exploratory outlays, but also his lease acquisition costs,
without discrimination. In a simple case, if I discover at a cost of $ioo
a one-year mine netting me $iooo, I get immediate depletion of $iooo,
the decline of value, ten times my discovery cost. In a more general case,
if I discover at a cost of $ioo a mine whose discovery value is also $ioo,
but which grows to be worth $iooo before I begin to use it, the accrued
income is tax free because I can then deduct $looo (or more!) in deple-
tion. And even the taxes which I do pay are deferred until long after the
appreciation of the investment value of my mine.
   Indeed, the present federal income-tax law seems to regard depletion
primarily as a recovery of leasehold costs. Other discovery costs are
recovered separately, either by expensing or by capitalizing and then
depreciating them. Percentage depletion is an option, the alternative
to which is to depreciate capitalized leasehold costs. (See McDonald in
Chap. ii of this book.)
   By the same token, depletion also lets landowners collect economic
rent from exhaustible resources of zero discovery cost, such as virgin
timber, shale oil, and now ground water and next, perhaps, topsoil. It
lets landowners recover the value of deposits discovered at their neigh-
bor's expense, which deposits extend under their land, even though
they never pay a tax on the windfall income.
   Thus, if our motive be to reward discovery effort, the use of depletion
allowances costs the Treasury more than it rewards the explorer. Profes-
sor Paul Davidson may have overstated his attack but he was and is
basically right about this (8, 9). He might have strengthened his case
by emphasizing that present law even extends percentage depletion to
landowners, to lower their tax liability not only on royalty income,
which has some relation to real depletion, but on bonus income, which
      Brown establishes the intertemporal non-neutrality of taxes on net business
income in his "Business-Income Taxation and Investment Incentives" (2).Actually
I think he got it backwards when he concluded that the bias is towards shorter lives;
it is the opposite, a point that Michèle Consigny and I have established and will
soon publish. But the present point is that income taxes are unneutral intertempor-
ally, as Brown and McDonald say. The popular notion that taxes can be neutral by
virtue of broad coverage has to be abandoned as soon as we test for intertemporal bias.
  378                                                 Editor's Conclusion

has none (26, p. 287, n. 2) and in neither case rewards exploration. The
frictional loss is so great that this must be classed as a primitive ineffi.
cient social instrument for its alleged purpose. We have also seen
(pp. 362—63) that the problems of measuring depletion, while concep-
tually soluble, are intricate enough to tempt tax agents to slide over the
basic concept in favor of spot values.
   The danger with any income-tax proposal is more likely to be over-
stimulation of discovery than the reverse. The taxation of realized cash
income puts a premium on acquiring assets that appreciate over time
before incurring tax liability; and unripe mineral deposits suit that
description nicely. The bias is even stronger if the appreciated value may
be written off as capital recovery, even though the appreciation was
never taxed as income.
  4. Taxes from mine rents could be used to finance, and better yet,
to motivate public exploratory outlays.
  It is questionable if prospecting is properly an exclusively or pri-
marily private function. State and federal agencies should explore un-
derground resources more actively than now, just as they conquered,
explored, arid surveyed public lands in the nineteenth century.
  Public exploration permits pooling and disclosure of information
obtained. It avoids costly duplication. The social value of the informa-
tion gained by private prospecting is greatly diminished by secrecy.
Public disclosure of the findings of public exploration would enhance
their value, especially in finely subdivided areas, offsetting the possible
lesser efficiency of a government operation.
  Public prospecting would permit a more sober and rational use of
information than presently. Now, advance information secured by early
prospectors is a fugacious asset which must be exploited before the
next prospector duplicates it. That sometimes injects an element of
frenzy into lease hounding which does not conduce to rational behavior,
as noted in Gospel: ". . . a treasure hid in a field; the which when a man
hath found he hideth, and . . . selleth all that he hath, and buyeth
that field."
  Public prospecting and disclosure would do much to dispel the aura
of mystique which now surrounds exploration, as it does any private
monopoly of arcane lore. The mystique is worth dispelling because it
lends itself so nicely, as any plunge into the unknown, to exaggeration
and exploitation to claim special privileges.
  Private prospecting is partly a gamble and as such tends toward ex-
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 379

treme inequality of income and wealth,25 which is socially disruptive
and politically anti-democratic. It favors giant firms which can pool
their risks internally, and large surface          20 who control more
of the underground than anyone else. It would do much for middle-
and lower-class Americans to remove such an influence from the distribu-
tion of wealth.
  The most and perhaps the only persuasive reason for advance pros-
pecting is the spillover value of the scouting function. Others can modify
their plans on the basis of geological information. Planning public roads
and common carrier pipelines would benefit. Other explorers can slack
off if they learn that ample supplies are already pinpointed. But when
prospectors treat their knowledge as secret private property, they do
not perform this important scouting function for anyone else.
  Textbooks tell us that perfect competition presupposes perfect knowl-
edge. When the object of our activity is to acquire knowledge, to
sequester it, to use it to acquire property, and even perhaps to surprise
and embarrass competitors or threaten off new entrants, it hardly meets
the standard. Public exploration is therefore an alternative seriously
to be considered.
  There are private consortia in some areas that pool their findings.
(They might be sticky about widening membership, however.) A corn-
    It might be thought that wins and losses from gambling would even out in the
long run. But in fact those who win in the first round have an advantage in the sec-
ond, because a gambler with a deeper purse has more options than his less
pecunious rival. So early advantages tend to snowball.
      The King Ranch, the Kern County Land Co. and the Northern Pacific Railroad
are obvious examples. A 1952 pamphlet, Railroads Discover Oil, by Merrill Lynch
et al. (fl), lists the following acreages owned in fee plus mineral rights:
                                                          millions of acres
            Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe                             1.8
            Atlantic Coast Line                                      .2
            Canadian Pacific                                       11.3
            Chicago, Milw., St. Paul & Pacific                      .3
            Northern Pacific                                       9.0
            St. Louis—San Francisco                                1.4
            Southern Pacific                                       4.7
            Union Pacific                                          7.5.
                                                                  36.2
All but the Canadian Pacific lands are in the U.S. The total is more than the area
of Illinois. Union Pacific makes about as much from oil as from railroad operations.
Northern Pacific stock tripled in i95i—5a with oil publicity from Willistbn. Stock
held in the large corporations is highly concentrated, as many studies have shown.
ESSO means Rockefeller; Gulf means Mellon; and so on.
  380                                               Editor's Conclusion

promise may be possible with government helping to finance explora-
tion in return for wider disclosure and, of course, higher taxes on post-
discovery rents.
   The Alberta system also has attractive possibilities. Lessees are sim-
ply required as lessees to disclose a great deal of information to the
province, which then publishes it. They must take core drillings and
furnish them to province geologists, keep logs, etc. (29, p. 201). Kansas,


                      Figure 4 A
Present                                                          MPVR
Values
 ($)




                      Figure 4 B




          1966            C                    A          Calendar Years


                              FIGURE C.4
Moving Present Values (MPV) of Revenues and Costs of Mineral Discovery and
Development; and Stationary Present Value (SPV) of Revenues Minus Costs
                   (R-C) Referred to a Base Year, 1966
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 8i
which lacks Alberta's leverage as landlord, achieves something of the
same result by law.
   Comparing public exploration with the proposal to expense explora-
tion outlays, one notices a likeness. In both cases exploration is financed
with public funds. In the former case it is publicly administered, in
the latter privately. In either case taxation of mineral rents is possible
without discouraging prospecting.
When to Explore (and Three Misleading Analogies). There are then
four possible ways to tax mineral rents and still motivate exploration.
Now we come to the interesting quantitative question: How much
exploration is just enough, but not too much? When is soon enough, but
not too soon?
   I have been writing as though the motive to explore were an unquali-
fied good. Yet it is entirely possible to motivate too much, and too soon,
and it may well be that we are doing so. If that sounds like desecrating
church, mother, and flag, beware! It only betrays one's long exposure to
the pro-exploration bias that suffuses our traditions so thoroughly we
are scarcely aware of it. Men who on most issues seek an optimal mod-
erate target as a norm will find that they can conceive of having too
little mineral reserve but hardly of having too much. It is as though
one could be too thin but never too fat.
   But it is possible to explore too much and — equally wasteful — too
soon. I have discussed selecting a year of discovery when the present
value (PV) of a mine net of discovery costs stopped growing faster than
the rate of interest. Figure C.4 shows the relevant quantities.
  The "Moving Present Values" (MPV) are present values computed as
in Figure C.3 (p. 349). Each is the maximum PV (R-C) that could
be achieved by beginning production in the current year. By waiting,
this value rises if costs are falling or prices rising, as shown. This is
what makes lease values rise, and makes owners hold them for the rise,
for lease values represent the net value of a resource after all non-land
costs.27
  Since this is a net value after all costs, including interest costs on
  2TIn a perfect market, however, lease values will not rise as fast as MPV (R-C).
Rather, they would grow exactly at the rate of interest, along the compound interest
curve in Figure C.4B. The expectation of future value assumes a present value some
years before the optimal date to begin liquidation, as shown. The conditions under
which leases are written, however, probably do not allow full expression of those
foreshadowed values in the market for leases. Rather, they show up in inflated prices
for ranch land, reservations of mineral rights, etc.
  382                                                Editor's Conclusion

non-land outlays, it is socially desirable to conserve the resource so long
as its appreciation outpaces the relevant market interest rate. The time
to begin discovery and development is when the lease appreciation
slows down to the interest rate or less.
  That is the year in which the non-moving PV of the lease is a maxi-
mum (A). On Figure C.4 this stationary PV is based on the origin,
1966, but any other year would do as well;
  It would not make sense to hold the lease until its MPV was a maxi-
mum. That might be never; and in any case it would deprive us of
interest on the net value of the resource in situ.
  It would not make sense to develop the lease as soon as it assumed any
spot liquidation value (C), for it is then of negligible current net value,
but appreciating much faster than money in the bank.
  It would make even less sense to develop the lease at the time D (not
shown in Fig. C.4) when it first developed a perceptible market value.
D would come before C. D would be the year in which the remote future
possibility of rent-yielding mineral development was first faintly sus-
pected. For a future net value, once foreseen, always has some present
value, however small.
   A tax that takes a fixed percentage of the rent will lower the absolute
but not the percentage growth of MPV (R—C) and so leave unchanged
the dateof A, the time to begin exploration and development.
  But before discussing tax policy in detail, let us elaborate on my
allegation that A is indeed the normative time to begin exploration and
development. Many readers will not find the mathematical-graphical
approach persuasive. Many economists and others have tended to reason
the issue through on the basis of analogies to other resources. And this
kind of analysis must be met, for it effectively blocks perception by
many people of the principles in Figure C.4. It particularly blocks the
realization that discovery should not ordinarily much precede de-
velopment.
  Analogies are always tempting. They let us analyze a new situation
just as we did an old familiar one, using thoughts that. fit us as com-
fortably as an old shoe. But they may not fit our subject that well.
Reasoning by analogy is, indeed, one of the classic fallacies of logic
and exposition.
   Analogy has been widely used in analysis of exhaustible resources.
So deeply rooted in our subject are several misleading analogies that it
is well to analyze them explicitly before moving to final conclusions. I
MASON CAFFNrY                                                              383

will discuss three: that prospecting is analogous to other production,
the discovery being the product; that the margin of mining is like the
margin of cultivation (or of other permanent land use); and that min-
eral reserves are like other inventories. While the analogies are half true,
that only makes them the more dangerous by masking their fallacies
behind a face of plausibility. We will see that minerals are in some
ways unique, sui generis, and require custom-tailored analysis• and
policy.
  Prospecting is not entirely analogous to other production. Many
economists regard discovery as similar to planting a new forest Dis-
covery produces discovery value just as planting produces saplings. The
investment slowly ripens over time, until the ripe investment is har-
vested, returning to the investor principal plus accumulated interest.
Discovery is the cause, and appreciation of mineral values is the effect.
That is the analogy on which they base their thinking.
  But there are differences between finding what exists and creating
what didn't. There is important economic truth in the literal truth that
Nature, not man, actually produced mineral deposits.28 Discovery has
elements of sheer acquisition, as well as addition to value. Where tenure
is perfect, leases sell for high prices and "discovery" by the lease buyer
is partly outright purchase: the purchase of a high probability of finding
minerals is only a step away from buying the minerals themselves.
   The acquisitive element manifests itself in another way where no
one has perfect tenure of undiscovered minerals, and discovery estab-
lishes ownership through some rule of capture, or adverse possession or
prescriptive or prior appropriation principle. Under such institutions
unbridled outlay by prospectors should dissipate rent entirely, as with
Pontecorvo's fisheries or other open-access resources. As Gardner men-
tions in Chapter 8 of this book, prior appropriation is a commonly
applied working principle in mining law. It was from the custom of
miners, indeed, that the principle found its way into water law.
  In case of minerals other than the fugacious this principle has a spe-
cial acquisitive twist, since discovery closes the open access. (Discovery
of oil pools does not close access if others may still tap in. Here; rent is
dissipated after discovery.) What I find today, you cannot profit by
finding tomorrow. Dissipation of rent, therefore, must occur before
discovery, during the period of open access. It takes the particular form
  '   Professor Davidson deserves credit for emphasizing this point (8).
  384                                                        Editor's Conclusion

of premature acquisitive searching in a race to establish tenure. Rent
is swallowed up by interest on premature advance exploration outlays,
outlays whose timing is advanced by the imperative to outrace others
who are likewise motivated.
   Mineowners may then think that the rents they get are necessary to
cover interest cost on exploration outlays long past, or on their huge
inventories of reserves. From their individual viewpoint, under present
policies, they may be thinking reasonably. But the social economist
must see beneath the veil of familiar institutions and the fallacy of
composition and ask deeper questions. Is there any aggregate social bene-
fit from advancing prospecting costs so many years before use?
   The analogy between finding minerals and planting trees misleads us
because undiscovered minerals, unlike unplanted trees, appreciate.
   If minerals exist, they are almost certain to be found one day. They
appreciate before being found as well as after. Several factors conspire
to that end: demand grows; older deposits dwindle; science and tech-
nique advance, lowering costs of producing as well as of finding; popu-
lation spreads out, bringing demand nearer to remote deposits; trans-
portation lines reach out; United States military bases and political
influence establish a firmer Pax Americana over insecure areas; etc.29
Compared to such powerful and expensive factors, an act of discovery
appears a small part of the complex of conditions that permit mineral
extraction.
   In some cases, and in some measure, discovery is prerequisite to and
helps guide the other activities, and therein lies the most likely ration-
ale for early scouting of the underground. But even under assumptions
most favorable to the argument, the scouting function is only one of
many outlays necessary to make minerals appreciate.
  There are those who will hasten to tell us that minerals have no
value unless they are discovered. The allegation is neither correct nor
relevant.
  It is incorrect because prospectors in fact pay landowners lease bonuses
and rents, and agree to give one-eighth or more of any gross for the right
to explore for minerals under lands whose location relative to market,
    If we assume U.S. military outlays are indeed guided by mineral acquisition,
then (a) we have a serious indictment of U.S. policy, and (b) the minerals should repay
in taxes the cost of the military outlays. On the other hand, if military outlays are
made independently of mineral acquisition, then exploration serves no "scouting"
function for the military and cannot be so rationalized.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                      385

collection lines, established fields, and propitious geological formations
indicates a high probability of uncovering minerals whose present worth
is more than finding costs.
  It is irrelevant because no single economic input has much value
until combined with others, and we can never impute the whole product
to one input on the grounds that the input is indispensable. Several
inputs are indispensable, above all the mineral deposit itself. Fortu-
nately, generations of economists have already explored the fallacy, and
developed marginal production analysis and linear programming to
handle the problems of imputation and distribution. Unfortunately,
capital theory, needed to help us cut the pie when production extends
over many years, remains underdeveloped. But the doctrine of dis-
counted marginal productivity has set out the essentials. No one who
has mastered marginal analysis can doubt that a mature capital theory
will limit the prospector to a cut of the pie based on his marginal con-
tribution. Our analysis above (pp. 340—67) takes a step in this
direction.
  Now, if finding costs are not to exhaust the entire value of their
"product" — i.e., the discovery value of minerals — it is necessary that
we defer exploration until social discovery value has risen to exceed
discovery cost, preferably by a wide margin. Otherwise, the entire pros-
pecting activity yields no social surplus, but consumes as much value as
it returns.
   Under perfect tenure and competition, the rational and enterprising
landowner defers discovery and therefore development until the net
lease value stops appreciating faster than money at compound interest —
the point I am here supporting. A neutral tax preserves this timing
unimpaired. A better-than-neutral tax would sharpen competition and
apply leverage to make sleeping absentee owners more enterprising; but
it would not force an advance of exploration and development before
the perfect market timing. It would simply make markets more nearly
perfect.
  In the absence of good tenure the market fails, and premature invest-
ment in discovery is the rule. No one then waits for leases to rise to
a maximum present value before exploration. As soon as discovery
value covers discovery costs, exploration begins. Monopolists do not
even wait that long, nor would interlopers who might hope to blackmail
a monopolist.
  In this condition, taxation of post-discovery rents is desirable pre-
  86                                                        Editor's Conclusion

cisely because it would defer exploration and close the gap of years
between investment in discovery and actual use. The appreciation of
minerals that now occurs after discovery, at a rate about fast enough
to return interest on discovery investments, would then occur free,
before discovery — a good bargain for society, turning base metal into
gold. Thus, mine rents would be created by the very act of socializing
them — an interesting reversal of the more usual case where taxes impose
an excess burden.
  Note that these taxes would defer exploration, and not necessarily
reduce the aggregate effort in the long run. If we begin from a condition
of redundant discovered reserves inherited from previous institutions,
there would be less exploration during a transition while we worked
down the surplus, and recovered for more productive uses a great fund
of real social capital now frozen in the reserves. (In the present acute
shortage of capital that would be a very useful thing, supplying needed
capital to the rest of the economy.) After that the need to maintain level
stocks and replace depleted reserves would prescribe as much explora-
tion as before. The difference would be in a leaner industry, carrying
less reserves.
  The margin of mining is not analogous to the margin of "cultivation"
(or other production) of a flow resource. The idea of deferring dis-
covery, and therefore use, until minerals have risen well above zero
net value may seem to run counter to the general principle that we
should use resources as soon as they become supramarginal. It might
seem that discovery has beneficial timing effects by advancing the date of
use of any supramarginal mineral deposit. But that principle applies
strictly only to inexhaustible perpetuities, or flow resources.
  Fund resources may be ready to yield a surplus above discovery, devel-
opment, and mining costs, and yet remain unripe for harvest. Their
net liquidation value may be appreciating faster than the interest
rate,3° making them submarginal for use in all years until their net
liquidation value stops growing so fast.
   Everyone recognizes that mineral extraction is non-repeating, so that
timing is the essential economizing choice. We often forget, however,
that discovery is equally non-repeating and the timing is equally critical.
   3°That does not mean their exchange value in place would rise faster than the
interest rate. The emplaced value is the discounted value of liquidation in the most
favorable Set of years, and in a perfect market grows exactly at the rate of interest.
This is shown on Figure C.4B as the compound interest curve.
MASON GAFF NEY                                                      387

The opportunity to discover is, as Vickrey has said, a species of exhausti-
ble economic opportunity. The optimal time to discover may very well
be only a short period before liquidation begins, even though that
entails letting resources rise above the marginal condition before they
are explored.
  When resources are marginal it means the present value of costs just
equals the present value of revenues, so that any decision lowering costs
or raising value of revenues by a small percentage has great leverage on
net rent and raises this by a large percentage, as Herfindahl brings out
in Chapter 3 of this book. The net present value of undiscovered
marginal or slightly supramarginal minerals may therefore easily be
rising faster than the interest rate, due to a much slower percentage rise
of demand or drop of costs, warranting deferral of discovery and
use. Discovery is not timely until that net present value, net of both
development and discovery costs too, stops rising faster than the inter-
est rate.
  The fact, therefore, that oil companies hold millions of acres around
the world which they hope to explore sometime in the future does not
necessarily betray monopoly designs. It might or it might not. Under
perfect competition and neutral taxation it still is good social economics
to hold minerals so long as their value in place grows faster than money
at compound interest. Only those who hold them longer than that, or
who reckon unreasonably low rates of interest, are behaving like
monopolists.
  The discussion so far assumes that prospectors can distinguish in
advance the better from the worse opportunities. But what if they can-
not? Certainly they cannot always, and the oftenest repeated argu-
ment for favorable tax treatment of those who strike it rich is the need
to cover the costs of dry holes and less productive wells or mines. So let
us entertain the assumption of homogenized expectations of success by
prospectors, and see where it leads.
   If each prospector is faced with the average expectation of success
and we let the lucky winners keep the full mine rent, we would over-
motivate prospecting. It is as though we took all the economic rent of
land in New York City and spread it around equally among all the
city's landowners, and let any landowner join the city. The meanest
marginal location would net as much ground rent as Broadway and
42nd Street. So, naturally, every peripheral farm owner would turn his
   388                                                         Editor's Conclusion

land to urban use to share in the rent, until the city covered half the
state and the rent was dissipated.
   In the case of prospecting, if we let the aggregate discovery value of
findings be the motive to prospect, we will call forth an aggregate
exploratory effort roughly equal to the prize,3' thus eating up the entire
value of the prize. Such a procedure flies in the face of all marginal
economic analysis. It is motivating the prospector's marginal effort with
his average product rather than his marginal product — a remarkably
Marxian argument to be the bulwark of private rent collection. The
rent of good land will be used to subsidize exploration of bad land, not
just marginal but submarginal.
  So the dry-hole argument turns Out tO be a variation of Marx's theory
that labor creates all value, and is no more worthy of serious considera-
tion. Even if prospectors' expectations were entirely homogeneous it
would be desirable to charge some mine rents to defer the premature
exploratory outlays.
   In a perfect market with perfect tenure, as before, lease prices would
serve to siphon off the surplus motivating rent. On the public domain,
however, or on other open-access lands, letting discovery win a full
equity in the findings will badly overmotivate prospectors.
  The dry-hole argument has, to be sure, its proper applications. A
gusher on private land whose cash flow is 95 per cent quasi-rent is the
prize that has caused others to pay for leases a sum roughly equaling
the net present value of the gusher less exploration costs. The real
costs need to be recovered in one of the ways listed earlier. But the quest
of gushers on open lands will pull in too much investment in explora-
tion if we let discoverers keep their full value.
   Mineral reserves are not analogous to inventories. It is common to re-
gard advance untapped reserves of minerals as a kind of company or na-
tional stockpile.32 Much of the conservation literature, the alarmist
     And possibly a good deal more valuable than the prize, if the spirit of Las Vegas
prevails. Marshall observes ". . . if an occupation offers a few extremely high prizes,
its attractiveness is increased out of all proportion to their aggregate value." Folklore
has it that the sum of prospecting outlays exceeds the discovery value of minerals.
If true that is no defense of present institutions, as often alleged, but the roundest
condemnation. It means we have organized mining so cleverly that the net social
value of our country's great mineral resources is negative.
   32 "This exhaustion or depletion resulting from production is likened to the using

up of raw materials in manufacturing," Prentice-Hall, Federal Taxes 07). The terms
"fund" and 'stock" resource, applied to mineral reserves, reflect the same kind of
thinking. They are semantic booby-traps.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 389

kind, suggests a high degree of uncertainty about future discoveries, im-
plying or stating that much longer advance reserves would be optimal;
and that means widening the time span between discovery and use,
either by advancing discovery or retarding use, or preferably both. The
notion advanced here of deferring discovery until just before use would
be scouted as an irresponsible hand-to-mouth philosophy courting im-
minent danger of exhaustion.
   But mineral reserves are not discovered in one-year bundles. Mineral
deposits share some of the traits of an economic fund, but some of the
traits of land. Like other land, they are "indivisible in time": that is,
when we discover a mineral supply for next year it includes a supply
for the next to 100 years, willy-filly.
   Future reserves thus occur as by-products of current supplies. So we
need not defer the use of discovered minerals in order to have future
reserves. Presently producing mines include future reserves, except in
their twilight years. All mines might go into use as soon as they are
discovered and an industry still have from 15 to 50 years' reserves or
more.
   That may well be more than they would carry if mineral reserves
could be stockpiled in divisible increments of one year. Indeed, it is
likely much more than they would then carry. What other stage of
industry carries a 15 to 50 year reserve of raw materials? When Fortune
ranks the 500 largest United States industrial corporations.by "assets per
employee," the ten highest are all oil and/or gas companies. Ranked by
"sales per dollar of invested capital," four of the five lowest are oil
or mining companies (13, p. 251). When we measure "bigness" by assets
instead of sales, Standard Oil of New Jersey outranks General Motors
(13, p. 226), the legend of whose unrivalled stature rests on high turnover
and gross sales as much as owned assets. At 6 per cent a unit of ore to
be sold for $ioo in 50 years has a present value of $5.43. One would
hardly bother to discover it today unless as an indivisible by-product
associated with a larger discovery to be used on the whole much sooner
than that.33
  '' President Haider of Standard Oil of New Jersey in 1963 estimated proven world
oil reserves at "over oo billion barrels, equivalent to about 35 years of production
at the present rate of consumption, and this is no doubt very conservative" (20).
Thomas Crocker, who is currently completing a study of the phosphate industry of
Florida, estimates a life index there of 8o to 120 years. (Computed by Thomas Crocker
from Plate 5, United States Geological Survey Bulletin No. 934, Phosphate Resources
of Florida, 1942, and a map prepared by Bureau of Sanitary Engineering, Florida
   390                                                  Editor's Conclusion

  Even the "twilight years" of a mine arrive not because the- miner has
exhausted the geological deposit. He has, rather, taken as much as he
economically can with his tired old fixed plant and the obsolete methods
it embodies. His short-run marginal costs have risen towards their
marginal value product. •But many a deposit is renewable by new
capital, like an urban site with a new building. It is the capital improve-
ments that are in the twilight years. The deposit still holds mineral
reserves.
   Over the life of the original mine improvements, several things have
happened: (a) they have surely depreciated and lost effectiveness; (b)
new techniques have evolved (secondary recovery, like steam injection in
old oil fields; refining advances such as taconite beneficiation, giving
value to previously submarginal grades of ore; new uses for by-products
and associated minerals — natural gas, helium, etc.); (c) new knowledge
of the field has added to proven reserves (every year much more oil and
gas, fOr example, are added to reserves by "revision" of old discoveries
than by new discoveries); (d) the location of the field has (probably) im-
proved by spreading of population and extension of transport lines; and
(e) the location of existing shafts or holes in the field itself has worsened
in relation to the unrecovered minerals, which naturally are the ones
to which they give poorest access. Contemplating the aggregate meaning
of the above factors, it seems that even mines near retirement contain
reserves. But that is a secondary point here.
   The primary point is that most mines are far from retirement, and
contain long reserves. Advance exploration years before use begins, and
idle deposits in cold storage, are not necessary to provide reserves there-
fore. An industry keeps reserves by using slowly what it has. Newly found
mines may often go right into use and an industry still have ample
reserves. If and when we are to defer the use of any deposit, it makes
more sense to choose one nearly exhausted so the conserved mineral may
benefit us in the near future; or else one not yet discovered, to spare us
interest on discovery cost.
   Conceivably most mines might approach retirement simultaneously,
threatening a reserve shortage. But in fact most firms or industries tend
to stagger their mines in order to maintain a going concern: to smooth
the yearly need for discovery and the yearly flow of output. They have
State Board of Health. Lands Owned by the Various Phosphate Industries in Polk,
Hilisborough, Manatee, and Hardee Counties, Florida [Jacksonville, 1965]).
MASON GAFFNEY                                                        391

some mines nearly exhausted, some fresh and new, and most in the spec-
trum in between.
   All we need discover in a given year, therefore, is enough to replace
the mines retired that year plus a few more for expansion, or less a few
if some retiring ones are replaced by secondary recovery from the same
deposits. As we have shown earlier, the number of years of future reserves
is determined by how fast it proves economical to remove known de-
posits. It is an index to the economical speed of amortization of mine
capital rather than to the nation's chances for survival. Reserves for
amortization double as shock absorbers; they should also be anxiety
relievers.
  Returning to Figure C.4 now, there is no need to question the opti-
mality of discovery at time A. Ample reserves for the near future lie
behind existing shafts. Ample assurance for the further future lies in
the high price of leases to explore propitious untapped land. The rea-
son we carry reserves as long as we do now is for amortization, not secur-
ity, and those reserves provide more than the security we need.
   So much then for the three false analogies that block perception that
landowners should defer discovery and development of minerals so
long as title to the undiscovered minerals appreciates faster than money
in the bank.
How We Overmotivate Exploration. Next let us see if prevailing
institutions seem likely to encourage individuals to time exploration
that optimal way. I submit that we tend to overmotivate exploration for
nine reasons which I will now treat. They entail the following: open
access to undiscovered minerals; preclusive acquisition to enhance mar-
ket power; duplication by vertically integrated firms; artificially high
prices; the need to replace the flexibility destroyed by prorationing; the
leverage of private over public investment; the publicity —promotional
value of discovery; management self-aggrandizement; and tax favors.
  Mineral law is the Ur of the Chaldees of the appropriative principle
that discovery establishes ownership. Staking a claim on public land
is a time-honored process. Most National Forest land, for example,
unless reserved, is open to twenty-acre mining claims, which blanket
some areas of the West.
  It is widely understood that the rule of capture motivates premature
use of fugacious petroleum. It is not so widely understood, but more
forcefully true, that open access for prospectors followed by closed access
after discovery overmotivates prospecting by a larger factor. The oil
   392                                                        Editor's Concluston

pumper only gets what he pumps up; the discoverer gets the, whole re-
source. The entire discovery value of resources becomes .the motive to
explore. It calls forth outlays roughly equal to itself, dissipating the
entire rent by interest costs on early investments.
  Like all pure concepts, cases of completely open tenure of undis-
covered minerals today may be hard to find; but so are cases of com-
pletely closed, or perfect, tenure.34 There is commonly some element
of imperfection in the tenure of undiscovered resources: it is hard to
see how tenure of the unknown could be truly perfect. Exploration is
a game of Bingo in which superior minerals, the motivating prizes, are
subject to capture. Prospecting on closed land differs from prospecting
on open land in that one must buy a ticket of admission first —i.e., pay
for a lease — and that does indeed cut down the excessive effort and
retard the premature effort. The rational landowner tends to hold back
his lease until its market value stops growing faster than money at
compound interest, at which time its present value (referred to any
fixed base year) is a maximum. And that is the economical date to
begin discovery, as established above. But there are biases in the market
which tend to advance exploration.
  Unequal access to information is one. A few giants, with teams of high-
powered geologists, operating among and dealing with local land-
owners who live on a different cultural and financial level, constitute
an imperfect market. The Houma Indians of Terrebonne Parish, Louisi-
ana, for example, bargained at a great disadvantage with Humble Oil
Company, according to a current lawsuit, and signed in their ignorance
very disadvantageous leases in 1937. When a giant gains advance in-
formation on the underground his lead is a fugacious resource. He tries
to capitalize on it before the nearest rivals35 duplicate it, and before
     In a dynamic world, social institutions chronically tend to lag behind individual
enterprise. The legal right to do something often develops as a delayed response to
the fact that people have been doing it for years. Thus the Geneva Convention of
1958, not yet ratified, seeks to formalize national jurisdiction over offshore waters.
Meantime drilling goes on apace, if anything stimulated by the near certainty that
the ancient customs of mankind plus the force of their governments will let use
establish tenure.
   "At least the nearest minor rivals. The more "gentlemanly" majors tend to follow
"the time-honored practice of staying clear of the other fellow's territory," according
to Howard Kegley, oil editor of the San Francisco Chronicle, "to avoid running up the
price of leases," Thus there is for the first major in a field a precarious grace period
during which to snap up leases at bargain prices. The bias toward early exploration
is manifest.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 393

local landowners get wind of it and raise their demands. Where the
contrast is very great between the information held by a prospector and
the local surface landowners, he is almost in the position of one working
on open public land. His urgency is in some ways even greater because
the overt approach of a rival may raise lease prices and so devalue his
information, even if the rival never finds the prize.
  Another market imperfection tending towards premature exploration
is the contrast in financial strength between giant corporations on
one hand, and on the other local landowners with poorer access to
credit and correspondingly higher internal or insular individual rates
(i.i.r.) of time discount. Ancient possessors with higher i.i.r. will sell
a lease to buyers of lower i.i.r. earlier than if both had the same i.i.r.,
because the expectation of future income has higher PV to the buyer of
lower i.i.r. Then, terms of the lease sale36 will often require early ex-
ploratory outlays to protect the seller who wants to begin receiving his
/8 royalty soon. Landlord-tenant relations here, as elsewhere, often
distort economic decisions.
   The primarily acquisitive nature of much advance exploration is sug-
gested by the fact that each year's addition to known reserves consists
less in new discoveries than in revaluation of old ones (29, pp. 17—19,
et passim). That is, prospectors are busy staking claims to new resources
sometime before they have carefully appraised what they already own.
The lag between discovery and development is a long one.87
   Preclusion to strengthen market power is a second factor tending to
overmotivate exploration. Wherever there is imperfect competition
there is a bias to prefer exploration over development of controlled
reserves. Exploration invests a company's funds without adding to
current output, thus deferring for many years any price impact from
increased output. Exploration aids in preclusive preemption of the
industry resource base from potential interlopers. Discovery has high
  °° Leases are often of limited life unless production begins, forcing the lessee to
explore and begin producing. Yearly lease rentals which cease when production begins
also force action. The lessee may rationally produce initially only the minimum
necessary• to retain the lease or stop the rentals. The 12½ per cent royalty is a
retarding factor when a field is marginal by virtue of prematurity. So lease terms
permit retarded production, but force early exploration.
   ° About 19 per cent of the area of the U.S. was under lease for oil in 1960, and
i per cent of the U.S. was currently producing (Duncan Campbell [7, p. ii6, n. 51).
Leasing often follows geological-geophysical outlays. Many landowners, in addition,
must explore their own land without any lease — not all oil is produced by share-
croppers.
  394                                                            Editor's Conclusion

publicity value, adding to a firm's credit base and security sales message.
Investment in advance acquisition of reserves puts the assets of a large
company into cold storage, where they may earn a market rate of return
with minimum turnover and therefore minimum demands on an over-
pressed management of an oversized firm. It defers liquidation and
associated tax liability, and of course opens up broad avenues for tax
avoidance.38
  Firms whose market power hangs on resource control will naturally
put a higher value on discovery and acquisition than if markets were
purely competitive. Other firms seeking to work out from under this
control do the same. A kind of law of comparative disadvantage pre-
vails. It is much more important to a firm to get in on resources that
might be handy for others than to concentrate on resources already
firmly under its wing.
   Absence of any tenure opens access to all comers and destroys com-
petitive rent, which is bad. Absence of monopoly tenure opens access to
competitors and destroys monopoly rent, which is good. But the quest
to establish monopoly control, a sort of "super tenure," works the same
as the quest to establish proper tenure; that is, it advances discovery
effort wherever sellers are competitive in order to bring them into the
"higher" form of tenure.
  In the duplication necessitated by universal vertical integration, each
firm carries enough reserves for its own survival and there is no pooling,
so some firms must explore even though others hold idle reserves. This
is a third factor overmotivating exploration.
   The duplication might be less marked if the exact quantity of reserves
were a more definite and known figure. But the return to given explora-
tory outlays is probabalistic or stochastic. Since under vertical integra-
tion each company must assure itself independently of a firm supply of
raw material feedstock, the exploratory effort of each must be enough
to assure that the minimum, rather than the mean probable discoveries
suffice to fill its needs (its maximum needs, incidentally). The vital eco-
nomic principle of pooling risks, which affords such important economies
in insurance, banking, warehousing and other familiar businesses, is
denied.
    'Though there is an almost universal oversupply of crude, Jersey Continues
energetic exploration for it. 'It's a matter of strategy, not shortage,' [Jersey President]
Haider says" Business Week (6, p. 7). He is not quoted further on the point, but
one may suspect that "strategy" comprises some of the biases mentioned above.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                         395

   The greater is the dispersion of the ex post productivity of explora-
tory outlays around the mean expectation, the greater margin of safety
is required.
   It might seem that the surplus of discoveries that in the aggregate
must result from this peculiar incentive pattern would glut the demand
shortly and slow down future exploration. But it seems equally likely
that the surplus aggregate reserves, once found, would before long
prompt the finders to expand their output and then go on to repeat the
cycle as their exploration for replacement needs led in the aggregate to
more expansion. Thus the condition is chronic and repetitive.
   Utility regulation works also toward vertical integration and duplica-
tion. Each gas pipeline company must put supplies under contract to
qualify for its FPC certificate, as security for bondholders, and to protect
its share of the market. No nonsense here about relying on an open-
market supply of raw gas! Market imperfection is assumed and institu-
tionalized.
  International rivalries work the same way. Each major bloc must
control its own reserves and not count on surpluses of the other. Each
minor power center in the Western bloc tries to control its own reserves.
No one wants to rely entirely on reserves in politically marginal and
unsure nations (Iran, Saudi Arabia).
  Secrecy also forces different firms and neighboring landowners to
duplicate some exploratory effort, when they have not worked out
pooling.
   Mercantilist ideas about raw materials often cause primary producing
nations to tax or forbid export of unprocessed ores in an effort to force
processors to locate and pay taxes in the mercantilist jurisdiction. That
often forces importers to find marginal supplies while rich ones lie idle.
   High price umbrellas supported by cartel control of output from supe-
rior wells overmotivate marginal exploration, especially in jurisdictions
that enforce no prorate or which, like Alberta and Texas and Louisiana,
allow more production from higher-cost wells, or like Texas exempt
discovery wells from prorate for eighteen months.
  A fifth overmotivating factor is that the need for reserves for flexibility
is magnified by the inflexibility of allowable output from controlled
wells — prorationing.
   A sixth is the leverage of private over public investment. The flag
follows discovery into many areas. The private explorer who wins a
strike can usually rely on a shower of complementary public funds to
  396                                                        Editor's Conclusion

protect him, if need be, from national enemies39 (and even friends!);
to subsidize harbor and inland transportation works, perhaps through
World Bank; to extend pipelines to new areas inside the United States,
or at least Texas, even though the new areas' population does not carry
the incremental cost; to extend state-subsidized highways to new com-
munities that may grow up around mining employment; etc. Such in-
stitutions tend to subsidize and vitalize otherwise submarginal land
developments of all kinds. In less-developed foreign countries, as Roberts
brings out in Chapter g of this book, it is the miners who are the chief
outriders of the central economic system. They would not ride nearly so
far if they paid their own way in full.
   An important aspect of this lies in the economics of regulation of
utilities such as gas transmission lines. Permissible profits are figured
on original cost less depreciation. So the companies are under pressure
to expand constantly to keep up the rate base. They expand their col-
lection and feeder lines into submarginal territory, raising their rate
base and hence the rates they can charge in rich territory. Economic
rent is spread thin and partly dissipated in the process. But submarginal
lands are made supramarginal for exploration and gas production.
   Two of the facts of life assumed away by the pure theorist's assump-
tions are imperfect knowledge and imperfect allocation of credit reflect-

    See Wayne Leeman (27, pp. 183—84, 236—37) for a very niuted statement of the
case. Britain has been much more specific than we in protecting private mineral
concessions with the public armed forces. The British government, indeed, has itself
been a major owner since 1914. But who, one might ask, protects Britain, and why
did Britain accept the open-door policy in the Persian Gulf, which let U.S. majors in?
    As the U.S. becomes more and more an importer of primary materials there is
little doubt that it will move in the mercantilist direction of protecting its sources
with the sword. The U.S. clearly presided over the replacement of Mohammed Mos-
sadegh, the nationalizer of Abadan, by Fahedi, supplying dollars and trained police.
The close ties of oil policy and foreign policy came to the surface very clearly when
on January 11, 1953, the National Security Council, acting upon the urging of the
State and Defense Departments, ordered the Justice Department to withdraw its
criminal indictment of the five U.S. based majors whose conspiracy in restraint of
trade had been documented the previous year by an FTC report, the release of which
had required months of agitation. The rationale was that the revelations of the report
might weaken the majors in dealing with foreign governments. If State and Defense
run interference for the majors against domestic enemies, it seems a fair inference
they are doing the same against foreign ones. And not for the benefit of American
consumers, for whom the FTC spoke, but for the majors themselves. More recently
James E. Akins, an operations officer in the U.S. Department of State, has stated
openly and publicly that United States foreign policy in the Middle East is predicated
on the "enormous" American investment in oil there.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                        397

ing that ignorance. A central problem of business enterprise is always
to promote itself in the capital markets, to borrow and to sell shares.
Remote armchair investors are clearly biased toward the dramatic,
newsworthy, and glamorous.
  Given a choice between prosaic quiet development of owned re-
serves, therefore, and new strikes in Timbuktu or Xanadu, the ambitious
corporate manager may often prefer the latter for its publicity value in
the credit markets.
  On owned lands, landowners who should wait a few years for explora-
tion may often advance the date to get their land appraised, to the end
that it may better serve as collateral for credit, or stock promotion. The
information which exploration generates is not used for present produc-
tion, that is, but to reallocate the economy's pool of loanable funds to
the advantage of the landowner. Since that is purely redistributive, and
does not create net new wealth, it does not constitute any net social
payoff to compensate and vindicate the interest cost of the early explora-
tion. Note, too, that a rise in asset values is real income whose tax
liability is. deferred until realization by sale, but whose benefits are im-
mediately enjoyable by borrowing on the collateral that has appreciated,
and to boot deducting interest payments from taxable income.
   Separation of corporate management from ownership has been widely
recognized as the source of serious conflicts of interest. Public corpo-
rations essentially dominated by managers are a fact of modern life.
The managers' interest is usually to plow back undistributed profits
into the business, magnifying his own role.
  Thus any business with a rich rent-yielding core is liable to over-
expand its fringe and promotional activities, of which exploration is a
perfect type. We have seen and will see further that mineral industries
are extraordinarily rent-yielding. And how universally do we hear
corporation public-relations people justifying (for the benefit of those
who oppose high profits) high returns in some areas of their business
by the losses they suffer in others, as though the latter were necessary
to the former (27, p. 8i). In explaining this to stockholders, too, it is
always important to dwell on future prospects. They are much harder
to evaluate or refute than the bleak facts of today. "The future is the
refuge of those with no plan for the present."
  Thus some public corporations tend to become agencies for diverting
the surplus of rich lands to explore marginal ones ahead of their time.
  For many years now prospecting, especially for oil and gas, has been
  398                                                             Editor's Conclusion

overstimulated by a number of tax favors so well summarized by Profes-
sor        40 percentage depletion, capital gains, and expensing of
4'intangibles." Expensing of major exploration costs particularly acts
to advance these outlays. Expensable are: dry-hole costs; lease rentals;
geological cost not resulting in lease acquisition; intangible costs of
drilling and equipping productive wells; and cost of abandoned leases.
Expensing might be neutral if universal, but it is reserved for minerals'
exploration and drilling. As to tax liability, that waits upon realization
of cash income by liquidation. There is a long period when discovered
but untapped minerals rise in value yearly and in each subsequent year
rise enough more to earn interest on the previous rise, thus yielding
their owners a real income, but without being taxed. Michèle Consigny's
forthcoming work on this topic indicates this may be the royal road to
virtual tax exemption. The package of special favors is at any rate
material.41 Oil prospecting has become a fashionable tax shelter for the
affluent, pulling in great investments and extending the margin of
prospecting.42
  In addition to those special provisions, any corporation with a rent-
yielding core can help its stockholders by plowing back earnings into
expansion, whereby their tax liability is deferred and, if taken as capital
gains, cut by half or more. Again, recall that mineral industries are
extraordinarily rent-yielding at the core.
  Undertaxation in the past would not justify overtaxation in the future
(unless from a viewpoint of compensatory equity) if past policies had
left no heritage of oversupply. But in fact the excess of premature
findings now on hand is such as to let us temporarily regard discovered,
   ° Professor Kahn points out that double (or more) recovery of capital may make
it pay to invest in oil even when outlays exceed receipts (26).
   41 The habit of integrated companies of transferring crude to their refining divi-
sions at fictitiously high "posted" prices, in order to transfer profits to the crude
production division and enjoy the ensuing tax benefits suggests there are still net
tax benefits accorded to that stage. Kahn (26) and Leeman (7) document this
practice.
    Anything making in situ oil more valuable encourages exploration. One minor
provision warrants more specific mention in this context. That is the 50—per—cent—
of—net limit on percentage depletion. A firm may strike the limit if forced to tie
exploration capital Costs to higher cost wells. It may escape it by segregating dry-hole
costs and geological-geophysical costs from revenues of the producing wells that
ensue. This encourages advancing the exploration to ensure the desired segregation.
The limit only applies to the unit of property. It is not reached by deducting costs
from simultaneous income of other properties.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 399

undeveloped minerals as being more akin to gifts of nature than would
otherwise have been proper. At least for a while, it would not hurt to
undermotivate prospecting.
  There, then, are nine reasons why our institutions tend to over-
motivate or advance prospecting. On the other side, prospecting tends
to be undermotivated in subdivided areas by the inability of finders to
collect the full value of their findings, much of which underlie the
lands of neighbors.43 However, this argument may defeat itself, for the
element of secrecy often forces neighbors to prospect also, and subdivi-
sion may overmotivate prospecting by enforced duplication of effort in
subdivided areas. On balance, overmotivation seems the predominant
condition. It would be surprising if it were not, since a bias towards
capturing underdeveloped territory, even at high cost to central devel-
oped territory, is manifest in most of our social institutions for resource
development.
  A crude test of the question is, "By how much does advance discovery
precede development?" Here, the recent work by Lovejoy and Homan
(29), is quite suggestive. They find that each year's increment to "proven"
reserves consists more in development and revaluation of previously
discovered deposits than in "new discoveries." The implication is clear
that discovery precedes intensive development by many years.
  The upshot is that the motive to explore is not a fragile, precious
flower, but rather a lusty weed that wants some constraint.
How to Tax Mineral Rents. It is a curious commentary on our times
that the former notion of taxing earned (wage) income at lower rates
than unearned (property) income we have not only abandoned but
reversed. It is the style to pooh-pooh the quaint notion that high in-
come-tax rates might dilute the incentive to work. On this topic the
modern policy-maker produces a backward-bending supply curve of
labor and explains that "income effects" of lower after-tax labor income
more than offset "substitution effects" so labor may very well work longer
for less money. But when it comes to oil royalties, that's different!44
Here the incentive argument comes back to life and we hear that what
we thought was a gift of Nature is the work of men —men who will stop
work unless they receive large financial rewards! In the modern idiom,
    The high bonuses for federal offshore leases reflect in part the automatic pooi
unitization that follows discovery (Kahn [26, p. 291]). The finder acquires more than
a license to race with his neighbors for a pool to which many have access.
     Professor Kahn has earlier noted this irony (26, p. 297).
  400                                               Editor's Conclusion

labor income has become mostly rent, and land income is a necessary
incentive to call forth supply.
  In truth, the older idea had merit. If indeed our institutions over-
motivate prospecting it makes sense to tax mineral rents not just as
highly as other land income, but higher. And if it makes sense to tax
economic rent, then some mineral income can be completely socialized
without any excess burden whatever.
  The question that remains is simply how to do it. A modified income
tax, a modified property tax, and government ownership are the major
instruments for the purpose. Let us sum up our conclusions about each:
  Given perfect tenure, perfect competition, perfect knowledge, inter-
national amity, and neutral public-works investment policies —i.e.,
given the absence of the nine biases toward premature prospecting — a
business income tax could tap the rent of mineral land and exempt the
income of productive investments in exploring and developing it by
a fairly simple, straightforward device: let the taxpayer deduct his in-
vestment costs fully in the year expensed, except lease purchase, roy-
alties, and other payments for land.
  On the whole, Iconclude that an income tax so modified, while a
great improvement over present practice, is less desirable than a modi-
fied property tax. Income taxation with expensing poses a number of
problems.
   i. Given the nine biases for prospecting, an income tax fails to offset
the overmotivation because all prospecting is expensable, even on public
land. Conceivably the law might allow expensing on private land but
not on public. However, the matter is too subtle and many-sided to be
handled by any such simple formula, and in practice it is hard to see
how an income tax can discriminate among degrees of tenure (a property
tax does so discriminate, and very precisely).
   2. Expensing is hard to administer equitably, because there are many
new, small, marginal firms with no outside income from which to deduct
their capital outlays. How to treat such firms? None of the options is
wholly satisfactory: If we deny them any tax credit, then only giant
diversified firms can benefit. If the Treasury advances them cash, it must
lend without security and to almost anyone as a matter of legal right,
a dubious prospect. If we let them carry forward their deductions until
they have other income, we are denying them interest on their invest-
ment, which is the essence of the expensing feature. If we let them
MASON GAFFNEY                                                       401

carry forward deductions with interest, the rate would be the same for
all taxpayers, an advantage to the stronger firms whose insular individ-
ual rates (i.i.r.) are lower. Worse, we would be guaranteeing a fixed
tax-free return on all investments, however ill-advised, however filled
with graft for the taxpayer.
   3. At high tax rates a serious incentive problem arises after the tax-
payer has recovered his capital tax-free, with or without interest, because
all income above that base would pay a high rate The overage is
supposed to represent economic rent, but when we tax even economic
rent on a realized-cash basis we motivate taxpayers to convert cash in-
come to psychic income. The critical value, the maximum economic
rent, is much less sharply defined when the taxpayer keeps only a small
fraction of it.
   A bumbling manager on superior land would show little net income
over costs, including his and his nephew's inflated salaries and over-
priced supplies from his brother-in-law. Thus land rent, which we set
Out tO tax, would be diverted to private pockets or dissipated by incom-
petence; while the high tax rate, aimed at rent, would instead capture
the fruits of superior management. The leverage is applied backwards.
If a tax is to motivate men it must let them, and not the Treasury, retain
most of the marginal cash flow above a fixed basic charge.
   The proposal would in effect amount to an original lump-sum grant,
to encourage prospecting and developing, followed by a stiff tax on gross
income (net of operating costs, usually minor compared with capital
costs). Following initial investment, the taxpayer would suffer under
all the defects of a severance tax, or Ricardo's "tithes." Only the rate
would have to be much higher than a tithe: even higher than the present
o per cent, to compensate for the loss of revenue by permitting
expensing.
  To avoid demotivation, the annuity approach outlined earlier might
contain the germ of an answer. In effect, it could put the income tax
partly on a putative basis and give it some of the quality of the property
tax, based on expert and free-market appraisal of resource capacity.
  4. The personal income tax hits labor and management income, of
course, as well as property income, and it would require much more
than expensing of capital costs to convert it into a tax on land rent.
  The corporate income tax hits only property income, since manage-
ment is salaried and deductible. But it fails to tax unincorporated
   402                                                    Editor's Conclusion

owners, however wealthy, and it also exempts -the income of corporate
bondholders.
   5. If payments for land are not deductible, and productive invest-
ments are expensable, taxpayers will seek to disguise the former as the
latter. To overcome that, Treasury agents would have to show more
insight than they do today in the analogous case of preventing urban
real estate owners from assigning most of the value to depreciable
buildings when it is really non-depreciable land value.
   6. Changing the income-tax basis for going mines would pose a
formidable transition problem because of all the old records of capital
outlay that would be required to establish the investment history.
  The major advantage of the income tax over the property tax is juris-
dictional, thanks to the Sixteenth Amendment. The federal govern-
ment can also tax property, and actually has done so at least five times
in American history, but the levy must be apportioned among the
states by population, a weakening limitation. The income tax may
also capture some income from foreign holdings of United States na-
tionals and corporations, but the deductibility of foreign taxes limits
that, perhaps completely, perhaps more than completely. It may even be
that United States firms lower their United States taxes by deducting
overseas costs destined to generate foreign taxes —a pregnant topic for
future research.45
  A modified property tax has a better chance of being administered so
as to be neutral or better. The modification from present practice is to
exempt capital improvements, leaving the pure in situ resource value
as the base. Based on resource capacity rather than the performance
of individual men, this tax avoids demotivating post-discovery produc-
tion as an income tax, however well-intended, will. The present question
is, will it demotivate discovery itself?
  Under conditions where discovery creates tenure by closing previ-
ously open access, discovery creates taxable property where there was
none — from primordial chaos, so to speak. A property tax is then a
tax on discovery. But that is a virtue because under conditions of open
access discovery is otherwise overmotivated, as we have seen. The prop-

   4sPresident Kennedy's budget message of January sg6 urged blocking "the deduc-
tion of foreign development costs . . . to reduce the U.S. tax on their domestic
income," Foreign taxes are credited in full against U.S. taxes —i.e., not simply
deducted from taxable income but from the taxes themselves. See Philip Stern (go,
p. 3o).
MASON GAFFNEY                                                        403

erty tax discriminates among forms of tenure exactly in the manner that
is needed, and does it inherently because the tenure instrument itself is
the tax base. Thus it solves a problem which baffled us under the income
tax.
   Given perfect pre-discovery tenure, on the other hand, the property
tax may be made substantially neutral in most circumstances by im-
posing it on pre-discovery "leasability" values, previously discussed. Per
haps "pre-" and "post." discovery are oversimplified concepts. "During"
discovery is more meaningful, for discovery is usually a gradual process.
The tax assessor, by following the simple rule of keeping up with market
values, administers a tax that rises gently with the prospects of a field
during a protracted period of study and revelation of its detailed
anatomy.
  As experience brings ever sharper detail of a field into ken, the
property tax on the barren properties drops and on the fertile ones rises,
keeping the total about the same. That kind of administration of assess-
ment would make the property tax virtually neutral towards prospect.
ing. No doubt it will fail to be perfectly neutral, but no tax should
be compared to perfection for that is not a real alternative. Other taxes
are the alternative, and none other is so likely to approach neutrality.
  The sum of experience in a field, the production and prospecting
of many independent people, may raise or lower the earlier opinion of
its capabilities and so raise or lower the value of the tax base. The effect
is so diffused and remote from the activity of any one person, however,
that it would not normally deter exploration. To the extent that it
would, in special circumstances, it merely introduces into the property-
tax a small element of fiscal risk- and profit-sharing to temper its high
leverage effects. Some people seem to prefer that in any event.
  It may no doubt occur that random prospectors on land of no known
mineral content will strike rich minerals. Should these finds then pay
a property tax? There is no easy answer nor is any perfect solution
likely. But as a general rule, the biases toward excess exploration work
strongest on fringe or marginal lands, so taxing such strikes may do less
harm than good.
  So the in rem property approach to resource taxation has a basic
soundness lacking in the realized cash income approach, and warrants
heavier reliance. In addition to its basic merit it offers several advan-
tages.
  404                                                        Editor's Conclusion

  First, it applies leverage prompting landowners to behave more
economically, somewhat as would the interest on a heavy mortgage.46
Unlike the tax on realized cash income which blurs critical values at
high tax rates, the property tax accentuates and sharpens their definition
to the taxpayer. Let us note some of the ensuing benefits:
   i. Leverage on surface landowners, where mineral rights go with the
surface, overcomes the resistance that backward-looking traditionalists
sometimes offer to any change of land use. Under an equally high tax
rate on cash income, landowners might frequently prefer the psychic
security of their older ways. In less-developed countries, and anywhere
where much of the land is closely held by absentees too affluent or dissi-
pated or military to be enterprising, this factor can be crucial.
   2. Applying leverage will result in more compact fields and lower
collection costs. Lease values have a strong location element.47 Forcing
development in existing fields served by existing lines, and near mar-
kets cheaply reachable by new lines, will save large line costs.48
   To the extent that mineral location determines community location
such savings are multiplied in all community costs of overcoming
space. The isolation that curses many mining camps and towns will be
considerably relieved.
  3. Marginal resources will pay little tax — only the amount necessary
to offset and neutralize post-discovery taxes — and feel no leverage,
which is desirable.49 That lets their owners wait while the resources
ripen. The leverage to produce bears on owners of superior re-
   ° Unlike a mortgage, the tax involves no repayment of principle. It corresponds
  '
to the interest on a perpetual loan.
      "One hundred years ago, land at the heart of the Comstock Lode sold for $10,000
a foot, but dropped off sharply. 'The remarkable descent in value of mining land
was attributed to the fact that the Gold Hill miners recognized that the bonanza ore
body's chances for extension into adjoining ground became increasingly less likely
with greater distance from the center'" (Milwaukee Journal, November 15, 1964,
citing the Appraisal Journal [341.)
   "In difficult territory like Holland a gas feeder line averages $250,000 per mile
(, p. g7). In the Louisiana swamps it is $350,000 per mile (). The Gulf of Mexico
and the North Sea are also difficult territory. In the aggregate, line and other hauling
costs are comparable to exploration costs. An important social cost of pipelines in sct
tIed areas is their propensity to leak and explode. The FPC attributes 64 deaths and
222 injurie8 to this cause from io to 1965. As higher safety standards are enforced the
monetary cost per mile will no doubt tend to rise.
  "The precise detail of how to administer this policy is not supplied here, and
needs to be worked out. From Figure C.4B it is evident that some of the detail could
be interesting, because resources assume a value even when still submarginal for
present use.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                      405

sources, prompting fructification of stagnant reserves whose value has
stopped rising by a large annual percentage.
  Were it not for the leverage effect, the margin of resource use would
probably be extended by the exemption from taxes of improvements on
marginal land. That is, present tax policies hit marginal land and
thereby make submarginal some lands that will be marginal or better
under a neutral tax like the one here proposed. But the leverage of the
tax on superior resources might well be such as to supply the market
so well that presently marginal resources become submarginal, regard-
less. If present markets were perfect the leverage effect would be nil and
the net effect would be some extension of the margin, due to untaxing
of improvements on and cash flow from marginal land. In my judgment
present markets are so far from perfect that the leverage effect will on
balance predominate, raising the margin.
  Second, in rem property taxation of the value of mineral deposits
tends to promote competition. To the extent• that it succeeds it opens
the door to great savings not just to consumers but to the industry.
For a free market in ores releases each firm and other unit of interest
from the need to protect its individual resource base through vertical
integration, and spares all the waste and duplication that entails. It
opens the way to free-and-easy interfirin cooperation and specialization
of the kinds that man, the social animal, works out in an environment
where survival and security are the fruits of constructive cooperation
rather than avaricious or defensive acquisition.
• The modified property tax promotes competition in these ways:
   1. It falls heavily on the firm which seeks to control a market by
cornering the ore deposits. As these are monopolized their market value
rises and the speed of intended use falls. If the tax rises with the
value it becomes a tax on monopoly, in effect.
  One may object, the property tax has not worked that way in the
past. In fact it probably has, in many jurisdictions and industries, to
the extent that it has fallen on in situ values. But remember that we
are now analyzing a property tax modified to exempt mine improve-
ments. Today's property tax falls heavily on improvements and so hits
the competitor who fructifies reserves more than the monopolist who
sterilizes them. The modified tax would do the reverse, and so force the
monopolist to sell to competitors, not just to get rid of direct tax
liabilities but to lower the taxes on property it retains by reducing the
value given it by the monopolist's artificial scarcity.
  406                                               Editor's Conclusion

  2. Small, new, marginal firms with weak credit would benefit. The
tax would bring down the market price of leases to explore superior
land, lessening the financial burden of entry, opening the door to large
numbers of small firms.
 The income tax tends to do the same, but is less effective. The im-
mediate impact of the property tax is on landowners, holdouts who
have not yet signed leases. Lease prices fall thanks to increased supply
more than reduced demand. The income tax, on the other hand, lowers
lease prices by lowering what buyers will pay, a less stimulating process.
With expensing of exploration costs, it might take some time for the
depressing effect of higher anticipated post-discovery taxes to work its
way through to lease prices. Some of the gain intended for prospectors
might leak away to landowners.
   Either tax, however, ranks high in this respect and is preferable to no
tax at all, even if the taxes be not needed for public spending —if infla-
tion, for example, be the alternative mode of public finance.
  .   Large mineral owners would lose much of the differential value
of their holdings as a credit base. It is through the mechanism of credit
rationing that the land giants gain much of their market power.
Focusing taxes on superior lands tends to equalize credit ratings. Owners
who create real capital to speed the rate of recovery would enjoy better
credit with taxes removed from real capital.
  4. Giant landowners would lose much of their power to engage in
extinction pricing. A tax on rent tends to remove the cushions of surplus
income and assets from supramarginal firms and lessen the differences
of reserve power among firms. Thus the giants lose their power to dis-
cipline competitive firms by losing some of their superior power to
absorb losses. The giants also lose much of the high rental income which
they plow back into expansion, something which modern income taxa-
tion prompts them to do as a primary method of tax deferment.
  5. The tax hits old and new firms impartially, in contrast to the
income tax, which is hard on new firms which lack outside income from
which to deduct early losses.
  A third advantage of the property-tax approach is greater ease of
transition. There is no need to reconstruct histories of past outlay. The
tax is based simply on present value capitalized from anticipated in-
come. The evidence is always at hand.
   The problem of hyper-accelerated liquidation during a period when
voters are debating tax increases should not be severe under the modified
MASON GAFFNEY                                                      407

property-tax approach. On marginal land, where acceleration would be
most uneconomical, no tax is to be levied so there should be no effect.
On superior land, acceleration over a few years would very likely
boomerang on the owner by giving the assessor an inflated idea of a
mine's capacity. Remember, too, that acceleration would entail heavy
irreversible investments in mine improvements, which improvements
and their cash flow would themselves be taxable in the event the present
proposal to limit the tax base to in situ values be rejected. Remember,
finally, that acceleration would lower spot prices and brake itself. All
told, it is neither a likely nor a disastrous outcome.
 • A difficulty in property taxation is assessment. The details of that
art warrant another volume and cannot be elaborated here, but to
observe that most of the art is simply to follow the market, which sets
values in the course of business.
  A great disadvantage of the property tax is jurisdictional because, as
mentioned, federal use of the tax is constitutionally unwieldly. It is
available to states wishing to accelerate their economic development,
but on the whole in recent years state governments have proven cartel
minded. In oil and gas it is especially obvious that state governments
are active and essential partners in the cartel. Their property-tax policy
of focusing on improvements what little tax there is appears as simply
another arm of a set of policies to restrict output.
  A solution to that is at the federal level, however, and analytically
quite simple. The cartel of mineral-producing states of the Union needs
to be relieved of its privileged control of the American market by free
import of foreign minerals — crude oil, tungsten-molybdenum, silver, or
what have you. In the revival of competition that would result, state
governments would find economic development more to their advantage
than cartel deportment and would break ranks, to the benefit of con-
sumers, workers, investors, and the overall health of the economy. If
the suggestion seems too large-minded for American politics, recall that
mercantilism, surely a small-minded philosophy, traditionally welcomes
the import of crude raw materials. It is their export which stamps one
a colonial.
   On the principle that rank-breaking is cumulative, all policies helping
to promote competition might be enlisted. Citing oil as one example,
another obvious federal move is to repeal the Connally "Hot Oil" Act
whereby federal power undergirds state restrictions on free oil in inter-
state commerce — one cannot but recall the Fugitive Slave Law and the
  408                                                     Editor's Conclusion

Dred Scott Case — and in its place to subject state governments and
their agencies to the antitrust laws. The 1943 Supreme Court declined
to interfere with state prorates,5° but dropped a broad hint: ". . . Con-
gress could, in the exercise of its commerce power, prohibit a state from
maintaining a stabilization program like the present51 because of its
effect on interstate commerce" (36 at 350). The 1943 Court was perhaps
passing the buck. Injunction of illegal acts is a judicial function. The
modern Court has acted more decisively in several fields when the public
was ready.
  The pace at which state and federal lands (primarily offshore) are
released to commerce should also be subject to the scrutiny of the FTC
and the Antitrust Division. Without extensive evidence it seems a rea-
sonable inference that states which limit private production to market
demand (at the seller's price) must also hold back state lands;52 and a
Congress which restricts imports and supports the Hot Oil Law and
excessive stockpiling would hold back federal lands and stifle Bureau
of Mines research. In fact it is Interior Department policy, based merely
on the Secretary's discretion, to abide by state-decreed allowables for
production from offshore oil lands! A voter-supported demand for in-
vestigation and reconsideration of our disposal policy could illuminate
the matter brilliantly, and get results.
  By this time it is obvious that I conclude on the whole that outright
government ownership is less desirable than property taxation., Govern-
ments own so much that they almost always administer their holdings
monopolistically, however enlightened they may be in other ways.
Alberta is the supreme achievement and the supreme disappointment
of government ownership of minerals. It is just another member of the
world cartel, limiting production to market demand at its price. The
Dutch Government; which also owns mineral rights, is equally or more
disposed to restrict output. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) is currently trying to prevent private oil companies
   '°See Parker v. Brown 317 U.S. 341, 6 S. Ct. 307 (1943) 06). I am indebted to
Stanley Hack, Attorney, for calling this to my attention.
  51The program at bar was the California Agricultural Prorate Act, originally of
1933.
  12California's East Wilmington field off Long Beach was held back until 1965, by
which time it had become "the richest known untapped field in the world, and by
all odds the most handily situated . . ." (Business Week [5, p. 36]). There were
special reasons — but aren't there always? In Alberta, which owns most of its own
mineral rights, land-disposal policy and production limitations are completely
integrated into one system.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                         409

from cutting prices. The historical record of governments as landowners
is such as to lead us to expect no better future performance, unless some
revolution in economic education fundamentally improves the behavior
of administrators and legislators.
   Where public lands are mixed with private, owners of the latter bring
pressure to underutilize the former and maintain artificial scarcity.
   Another common weakness is that of setting rents below the market
for the benefit of politically influential lessees, as on the federal domain.
   A third weakness is that of falling under the spell of irrational ideol-
ogies and slogans related to conservation, with overbalanced emphasis
on one aspect. Thomist-Marxist-Keynesian anti-usury bias often takes
sway. It dovetails nicely with the needs of monopolists, and makes the
slowest, least enterprising policy seem the height of "efficiency" while
an economical sense of urgency appears the most unseemly myopia and
greedy fast-buck profiteering.
   Minerals in the earth have some unique economic traits. Unlike other
land they disappear with use into the sink of time. And they originate
in the limbo of future time, unknown and unownëd.
   Each trait poses tax problems and has solutions. Countervailing taxes
on property value and on severance assure an economical timing of
extraction; countervailing pre- and post-discovery taxes on in situ prop-
erty values assure a correct timing of discovery. Even the political prob-
lem will be soluble when economists arrive at a working consensus
among themselves and offer the world consistent counsel.
The Share of Rent. In spite of the tendency of many policies to dis-
sipate economic rent, a large share of the cash flow in mineral industries
represents rent.
   One indicator of that is the very high rate of business "profit" per sale
typically reported by minerals firms. In Fortune's annual ranking of its
"500" by this criterion, mineral firms cluster at the top (ii). Combining
some accounting practice and economic theory, that means that minerals
firms have low explicit costs per dollar of sales. Business "profit" stems
from the implicit input of owned resources, in this case largely rich
minerals. The fact is more striking when we consider that these firms
may understate their profits by writing off capital investments twice or
more by expensing and percentage depletion.
  Explicit mineral rent generally takes three forms: lease acquisition
"bonus," paid usually before major exploration; annual lease "rental,"
paid until production begins; and "royalties," a share, usually one-
  410                                                     Editor's Conclusion

eighth, of welihead value. Professor Alfred Kahn has estimated that
from 32 per cent to 38 per cent of the value added by the oil industry
represented rent, in 1959—60 (26, p. 290). Professor Paul Davidson
puts it even higher, as "the major costs in oil exploration and develop-
ment           (8, p. 103). Kahn criticizes Davidson for simply adding
together royalties and bonuses, overlooking their different time-distri-
butions (26, p. 291, fl. 12). It is true that royalty dollars tomorrow
weigh less than exploration dollars today, which is Kahn's point. But
on Davidson's side, the lease bonus is paid well before the cash flows
back in, as well as before exploratory drilling. Those are heavy dollars.
Not only is the lessor paid first in time, but he is paid hard cash, leaving
risk to the lessee. Lease rentals, again, are paid annually during the
years before production begins. If, therefore, one reckons bonuses and
rentals as a share of cash flow, the different time-distribution magnifies
the former relative to the latter. It is not clear from Kahn's note just
how he treated this, but it gives the impression he was more concerned
to adjust his estimate of rent downwards for the lateness of royalties
than upwards for the earliness of bonuses and rentals.
  So if Davidson's treatment of time-distribution overstated the rent
share it is also possible that Kahn overcorrected him, and further re-
fining would raise the estimate. But in any event the rent share is a
very high one. And mark that "rent" here means pure land surplus net
of discovery costs.
  Davidson also raises the vital question of implicit rents that are not
reported as rents. He points out that royalty shares are subject to some
bargaining in the original lease contract when the cx post richness of
the deposit is still not exactly ascertained. Lucky lessees whose lease-
hounds secure rich deposits for low royalties collect some implicit rent.
Their opposite numbers who overbid, on the other hand, do not pay
more than the ex post rent as a royalty, for they are simply blocked from
producing at all until the royalty is renegotiated downwards.53
  More generally, there is no reason to assume that all or even most
mineral rent is explicit. Many firms and individuals simply develop
their own land. If Kahn's estimate omits, as it seems to, implicit rent,
the true rent share is much higher even than the high figure he gives.

    Davidson's "Reply to Campbell and Steele" (9, p. 128). The point is curiously
at odds with his reaffirmation on the same page that a negative royalty (percentage
depletion) will not encourage production. But later on (p. iso) he seems, more
consistently, to modify this position.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                                 411

  Again, some rent is now publicly collected by property, income, and
severance taxes — Louisiana, for example, takes i /6— which makes it
no less rent.
  In rich fields the bonuses paid are legendary. Hanson cites over
$20,000 per acre as a high in Alberta (21, p. 192) with a 1956 (a high
year) average of $i 200 per acre in proven areas.54 Kahn cites average
bonuses of $233 to $2267 per acre in auctions for offshore Gulf lands in
1959—62, with a royalty of 1/6 (26, p. 291). Considering that 19 per cent
of the United States is under lease (p'), the sum of payments is substantial.
  Another indicator of mineral rents is the wealth and success of those
governments which have seriously sought to socialize mineral rents.
Alberta, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, and even California (from
offshore lands) absorb high shares and enormous sums from oil pro-
ducers without seeming to repel them. One half of net has become a
sort of international rule of thumb, generally regarded as too favorable
to the major producers, who have made it a defensive line that is under
constant pressure. Competitive bidding in California shot the East Wil-
mington lease up to 94 per cent of net — probably an all-time high, but
much would depend on the detailed definition of "net."
   It is probably significant that so many economists who write about
oil give much more play to the concept of rent than it gets in most other
current literature. Davidson, Kahn, and Wayne Leeman are conspicuous.
Leeman did not even set out to include the production end of the busi-
ness, but was finally drawn to it regardless. (This statement is based on
discussion with Mr. Leeman. Also, see his The Price of Middle East Oil
[27].) Rent simply looms so large in oil and other minerals that an
economist cannot overlook it.
  Comparing mineral rents and urban rents, the latter are also high, as
reflected in unit values. But the urban rents are a much lower share of
gross. A new building outvalues its site by 3 to io times, and the turn-
over in commerce is so high that rental of building space may run at
2 per cent or 3 per cent of gross. Only in old slums does land rent take
the lion's share of gross. But even a new oil well pays the lessor at least
12½ per cent, plus prior bonus and rentals, and the oil lessee supplies
the capital improvements including exploration costs, dry holes, and
bonuses and rentals on leases that prove unproductive.
  Agricultural share leases run higher than one-eighth. The standard
    At Mt. Gilead, Ohio, $3o,ooo an acre has been reported for one-acre leases.
  412                                                 Editor's Conclusion

is5o per cent in a few prime counties; one-third is a floor rarely breached.
But there are no prior bonuses, and the landlord supplies buildings
and some other capital. Farm tenants are very crediç-needy compared
to oil lessees. The dilution of tenant incentive is offset by leasing more
land to better tenants. And there is nothing universal about the 50 per
cent rule. On less than prime land the landlord's share is lower. (For a
good basic source see F. J. Reiss [38].) On mediocre and marginal land,
sharecropping simply is not practiced, because too much of the small
surplus would be eaten up by the costs of the landlord-tenant relation-
ship. It is questionable if the mineral landowner's share is greater than
the farm landowner's in Champaign County, Illinois; but there is no
question that it is a much larger share than society now recoups by
taxation.
  Yet another indicator of high mineral rents is the ineffectiveness of
the 5o-per-cent-of-net limitation on percentage depletion. What other
industry could take full advantage of a tax provision letting firms deduct
27½ per cent of gross where that does not exceed 50 per cent of net
income? McDonald cites a Treasury sample study of large oil firms
showing they succeeded in deducting 26 per cent of gross under this
provision (see p. 270, n. 6). Evidently their net is high relative to gross —
a point, indeed, which is McDonald's major theme, and which he has
convincingly demonstrated in several prior works that he cites.
  What is true of the oil and gas industry may be even more true of
other mineral-extracting industries whose discovery costs are less. Recall
Henry Steele's figure on how much more money is spent searching for
oil than for all other minerals. With low discovery costs, the land in-
come is almost pure rent or surplus.
  It is inevitable in a progressive society that land should claim a high
share of cash flow in mining. If mines are currently marginal in the
sense that non-land costs would absorb all the gross, those mines are
normally idle. For the net present value in situ being zero, any remote
possibility of a better future would warrant deferring removal, the
percentage growth in net value being very high. The customary accept-
ance of a one-eighth royalty charge suggests that many landowners do
not consider putting minerals to use until they yield a nice surplus
(although sliding scales which put lower royalties on poorer mines are
sometimes encountered). Whether this surplus should be regarded as
a form of income, and therefore "rent," or be given some new name
(perhaps "hent?") is an interesting moot question. Personally, I regard
MASON GAFFNEY                                                               413

it as income, because it has appreciated from zero value, but that is not
vital here. It is a surplus that can be taxed without burden, and it is
a large amount.
An Overview. The most general fault of conservation policies and re-
lated tax policies today is their failure to implement the unanimous
recommendation of the conferees that society should use its best ex-
haustible resources first.55 Superior resources gravitate to strong financial
hands whose strength consists in access to money at interest rates lower
than those paid or imputed by most citizens; intertemporal allocation
of resources in strong hands is made at interest rates lower than prevail
elsewhere. The political strength of the strong hands often succeeds in
keeping property-tax assessments on the in situ value of reserves quite
low, minimizing carrying costs and the economic pressure to recOver
superior resources.
  The owners of superior resources also take the lead in schemes of
market control, restricting the output from superior mines in the classic
and heavily documented cartel syndrome: the owners of superior re-
sources hold a price umbrella, stimulating premature, excessive, and
geographically dispersed submarginal developments. Public policy and
the conservation ethic are harnessed to the service of cartels, and the
details of policy repeatedly betray the public's malignant ignorance of
the economics of rent. Private capital is wasted in developing sub-
marginal resources while superior or rent-bearing resources lie in cold
storage. Public capital is wasted as the political mechanism extends sub-
marginal transportation lines as a concession to the weaker resource
owners, who have numerous votes; and the regulatory mechanism
prompts pipeline companies to extend service to inflate their rate bases.
  Comparing states, for example, Texas leads in restrictive policies so
that it had in 1963 47 per cent of United States reserves, from which it
produced       per cent of United States crude (25, p. 272), whereas
Wyoming and Florida, marginal producing states, have no prorate at
all. Comparing nations, we restrict imports from superior Persian Gulf
resources compared to which most United States oil is marginal or
worse. The "Life Index" of Middle East reserves is about ioo years at
present rates, compared to our 121/2 years (26, p. 310, ri. 47). Restrictive
  ' This seems to be a general pattern of resource development. "Urban sprawl" is
closely analogous. So is "Cornbelt sprawl" and our whole agricultural pattern. Water
development follows the same course. We consistently underutilize superior resources
and prematurely invade the submarginal. See Mason Gaffney (19, 14, 15).
  414                                                        Editor's Conclusion

arrangements among the international majors dominant there also
deserve part credit for the slow use of these reserves (27 passim).
  Some marginal minerals also gravitate to strong hands —minerals that
are presently submarginal but are expected to become superior. Ad-
vance survey and preemption of resources presently submarginal but
potentially superior require what strong hands possess, waiting ability.
Political influence is also useful. Obstacles to survey in superior regions,
like subdivided ownership of mineral rights derived from surface rights,
and unreasonable holdout prices demanded by well-placed lessors, help
divert exploration to Ultima Thule, and the oceans, where primitive
tenure conditions bring the appropriative principle and lex fortioris
into powerful play — recall our nine reasons for premature explora-
tion — overmotivating prospecting. Overseas, prospecting becomes in-
volved in international rivalries and enjoys national support for political
and military reasons. The lives of American conscripts, in part or in
whole, become part of the public investment.
   One may wonder why I stress the underuse of superior resources more
than the complete non-use of marginal land, and marginal opportunities
on all land. Taxes on gross products, or on improvements, tend to make
marginal land submarginal, and lessen the intensity of use on all land.
Prorates inflate well costs and take out marginal land and prohibit deep
lifts. The reason for not stressing these effects is that they tend to be
compensated by lower wage rates and lower rates of return on invest-
ment, public works that bring in submarginal land, and exemption of
marginal wells from prorate. The residual waste is complex and many-
sided, but has as a most conspicuous aspect the underuse of superior
resources. To an extent, that means the underuse of marginal qualities
of superior land, notably deep deposits, and that is indeed part of the
pattern.56 The more serious net waste is the underuse of the superior
 aspects of superior lands, notably highly rentable deposits whose rapid
 fructification is blocked.
    All that adds up to a syndrome marked by wide diffusion of titillating
 possibilities, and restricted use of known certainties.57 The syndrome
   '   Sterilization of marginal deposits is often avoided by sliding-scale royalty and
severance-tax arrangements which put much lower user-charges on marginal deposits.
Alberta, for example, sets its royalties from i/6 on the largest wells down to 1/20 on
the smallest (21, p. 196). That saves the marginal wells — it may even foster premature
use — but the marginal Units from superior wells are subject to the higher rates and
are therefore used too slowly if at all.
     Any such formulary summary of a complex set of uncoordinated policies requires
 MASON GAFFNEY                                                                    415

betrays a social illness, to cure which we need attend to both efficiency
and equity. Both these are served by levying heavier taxes on the superior
resources, provided the taxes are designed not to retard output. Here,
heavy reliance is desirable either on the neutral tax on the net income
of mines, or for a more positive effect, on the ad valorem property tax
based on in situ value.
   A concern for conservation is out of place if directed against such
acceleration, because it is the slow use of superior resources that main-
tains prices, and so hastens the high-cost looting of marginal resources.
  A concern for efficiency is misconceived if directed against taxing
superior firms. It is misleading to equate supramarginal firms with
efficient ones. Supramarginality results from possession of great assets,
some interpretation. There is a specious contradiction between our summary and
Kahn's, but it is no more than specious. Kahn (referring to oil) emphasizes excess
capacity (not production) in known domestic fields (not foreign), and declining
domestic exploration (26, p. o6). These are twin children of low allowables per
well and unrestricted drilling in known fields. But the capacity is not used, hence it
is harmonious with our formula; and exploration outside the prorate states is not
discouraged.
   Inside Texas, regulation gives a favor to old, tired wells. "Strippers," which require
heavy pumping and secondary recovery wells may produce continuously. The "good"
public reason is "conservation" — waste not a drop of oil. The jaded observer of
economic institutions will not overlook, however, the evident preference to old-
timers (although this is tempered by exempting discovery wells for a maximum of
i8 months). This fits our syndrome in that marginal production is favored over supra-
marginal, although in this case there is no "diffusion of titillating possibilities."
Prolonged worrying of exhausted submarginal deposits is certainly not interpretable
as "intensive" resource use. It is persistent use, but intensity refers more to the speed
of removing crude when it is supramarginal.
   The general effect of a low monthly allowable is to increase the industry's well
costs. If 7½ days are allowed, it takes four wells to do the job of one. That, in turn,
discourages particularly the search for and development of deep oil, where well costs
are a high share of total. Remote, shallow oil on the other hand is encouraged (by
the price umbrella, etc.). The bias is against intensity in the third and fourth dimen-
sions. Horizontal hauling is not penalized — we have seen it is often subsidized. Verti-
cal lifting and prompt recovery are penalized. Here again is the "diffusion of titillating
possibilities." Intensive deep development and intensive fast use are estopped; exten-
sive shallow lateral wandering is encouraged in their place.
   Alberta, Texas, and some other jurisdictions give higher allowables to deeper
wells, tending to compensate for this bias (21, p. 204). Percentage depletion, a federal
institution, is based on the wellhead values, and thus helps deeper wells. Louisiana
allows more to offshore wells but that is probably a concession to high collection costs
as much as well costs. Given the rigidities of public regulation I doubt if the device
can compensate accurately. Where pushed too far it leads to another absurdity, lifting
deep oil up past idle shallow pools. And basically, of course, even if perfect, it pre-
supposes the more general absurdity of prorationing itself.
  416                                                       Editor's Conclusion

usually superior natural resources. Supramargiriality, far from con-
noting efficiency, lets a degree of inefficiency go undetected or uncor-
rected. Firms which are truly marginal must be ioo per cent efficient
or expire.
   Taxation focused on ownership of superior resources, therefore, is
not the taxation of efficiency. On the contrary, it makes supramarginal
firms more marginal and forces them to higher efficiency. As Professor
Kahn writes, we can have an "allocational optimum accompanied by
heavy taxes on the rents" (26, p. 297).
   By the same token, taxation of extractive industries is not necessarily
taxation of natural resources as such. The resource value of marginal
mines is zero — taxes that hit them are taxes on labor and capital; To
collect more taxes from natural resources, therefore, does not mean
moving tax burdens to extractive industries. It means moving tax
burdens from marginal lands to superior lands in all industries — a radi-
cally different notion.
  As to equity towards owners of marginal resources, that is met by
supporting government from the rents of superior resources, and met
more efficiently than by subsidizing the uneconomic development of
submarginal resources as• we do today.58 It achieves equity in a much
broader sense than present policy, because it is equitable not only
towards the owners of submarginal resources, but also towards the other
99 per cent of the population, who are frequently not considered in dis-
cussions of distributive equity among different resource owners. In situ
taxation also promotes equity and efficiency by lowering capital barriers
to entry into resource-based industry, and helping the competitive econ-
omy work better.
                                      Envoi
 Some of these policy suggestions may have early political possibilities.
Many of them do not, but that should not affect their appraisal by econ-
omists. No idea that is truly new will be politically acceptable for a
number of years. Society does not — or should not — support an estab-
     Wayne Leeman discusses at some length the international aspects of this proposal
in the Middle East (27, pp. 253—57), where the Pan-Arabian socialization of Kuwait,
for example, by the U.A.R. under Nasser, is a very real possibility. The international
majors Tationalize their high returns in the Middle East by citing losses elsewhere,
but he doubts if they possess the "moral authority" to act like a world government.
One also doubts if a world government should choose the method of waste as the
vehicle for redistributing economic rents.,
MASON GAFFNEY                                                       417

lishment of economists to advise the crowd to do what it is about to do
anyway; and economists do not —or should not — accept a role as either
hired guns or consensus-takers. Economists who think the profession
should try to assert some social leadership will, I hope, find the above
ideas worth entertaining.
   Anything worth doing is, of course, "politically difficult" or "impos-
sible." Only banal, myopic, timorous, corrupting proposals seem to
earn high marks from the seers of political expediency. I suspect they
do the American people an injustice, difficult though that may be.
Academic need not remain synonymous with irrelevant. Intelligent
policies, patiently detailed, realistically developed, and imaginatively
expounded are surprisingly, remarkably viable. They stir the imagina-
tion of dedicated men and enlist unsolicited support from the most
unexpected and influential quarters. It is not always necessary to indulge
the primitive, to cater to peasant avarice and anxiety, or cavalier prej-
udice and passion. People have been known to respond to appeals to
their public spirit and enlightened self.interest, and to appreciate the
implied compliment. People have been known to lose patience with
the plaintive demands of sheltered interests, especially when there was
something better available. In that spirit it is not unrealistic to speak
seriously of policies calculated to enhance the general welfare.


                               References
 i   Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Positive Theory of Capital, Vol. II of Capital
   and Interest, vols., South Holland, Illinois: Libertarian Press, 1959.
 2 Gary Brown, "Business-Income Taxation and Investment Incentives," in
   Richard A. Musgrave and Carl S. Shoup, eds., Readings in the Economics
  of Taxation, Homewood, Illinois: R. D. Irwin, Inc., 1959, pp. 525—37.
  Business Week, July ii, 1964.
4 Business Week, July i8, 1964.
  Business Week, February i, 1965.
6 Business Week, July 3, 1965.
7 Duncan R. G. Campbell, "Public Policy Problems of the Domestic Crude
  Oil Industry: Comment," American Economic Review, 54 (March 1964),
     114—18.
8 Paul Davidson, "Public Policy Problems of the Domestic Crude Oil Indus-
  try," American Economic Review, 5 (March 1963), 85—108.
9 Paul Davidson, "Reply to Comments on Public Policy Problems of the
  Domestic Crude Oil Industry," American Economic Review, 54 (March
     1964), 125—34.
io Melvin G. Dc Chazeau and Alfred E. Kahn, Integration and Corn petilion
   in the Petroleum Industry, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959.
  418                                                 Editor's Conclusion

ii Fortune, July 1965.
12 Fortune, May 1966.
i Fortune, July 1966.
14 Mason Gaffney, "The Benefits of Farm Programs: Incidence, Shifting, and
   Dissipation," Journal of Farm Economics, Proceedings Issue, 47 (December
   1965), 1252—63.
15 Mason Gaffney, "Diseconomies Inherent in Western Water Laws: A Califor-
   nia Case Study," Economic Analysis of Multiple Use, Report No. 9 in the
   series Water and Range Resources and Economic Development of the West,
   Proceedings of Western Agricultural Economics Research Council, Range
   and Water Section, Tucson, Arizona, January 23—24, ig6i, pp. 55—82.
i6 Mason Gaffney, "Property Taxes and the Frequency of Urban Renewal,"
   Proceedings of the National Tax Association, 1964, pp. 272—85.
'7 Mason Gaffney, "Rent and the Allocation of Land among Firms," in F.
   Miller, ed., Rent Theory, Problems and Practices, North Central Regional
   Research Publication No. 139, Missouri Agricultural Experiment Station
   Research Bulletin No. 8,o, Columbia, Missouri, 1962.
i8 Mason Gaffney, "Soil Depletion and Land Rent," Natural Resources Jour-
   nal, 4 (January 1965), 537—57.
19 Mason Gaffney, "Urban Expansion — Will It Ever Stop?" Land, The 1958
   Yearbook of Agriculture, USDA, Washington: U.S. Government Printing
   Office, 1958, pp. 503—22.
20 M. L. Haider, The Prospects of Petroleum, remarks to shareholders at 8ist
   Annual Meeting, Standard Oil of New Jersey, at Houston, Texas, May 22,
   1963.
21 Eric Hanson, Dynamic Decade, Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, Ltd., 1958.
22 Daniel Holland, "The Taxation of Unimproved Value in Jamaica," Pro-
   ceedings of the National Tax Association, ig6, pp. 442—70.
23 Harold Hotelling, "The Economics of Exhaustible Resources," Journal of
   Political Economy, g (April igi), 137—75.
24 Jens Peter Jensen, Property Taxation in the United States, Chicago: Uni-
   versity of Chicago Press, 1931.
25 James Jensen, "Texas: Balance Wheel in Control of Crude Oil Supply,"
   Land Economics, 41 (August 1965), 271—75.
26 Alfred E. Kahn, "The Depletion Allowance in the Context of Cartelization,"
   American Economic Review, 54 (June 1965), 286—314.
27 Wayne Leeman, The Price of Middle East Oil, Ithaca: Cornell University
   Press, 1962.
28 Allyn 0. Lockner, "The Economic Effect of the Severance Tax on Deci-
   sions of the Mining Firm," Natural Resources Journal, 4 (January 1965),
   468—85.
29 Wallace F. Lovejoy and P. T. Homan, Methods of Estimating Reserves of
   Crude Oil, Natural Gas, and Natural Gas Liquids, Baltimore: The Johns
   Hopkins Press, for Resources for the Future, Inc., 1965.
30 Stephen L. McDonald, Federal Tax Treatment of Income from Oil and
   Gas, Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1963.
31 James W. McKie and Stephen L. McDonald, "Petroleum Conservation in
   Theory and Practice," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 76 (February 1962),
   98—121.
32 Merrill Lynch et al., Natural Resources and the Investor, New York, 1965.
   Merrill Lynch et al., Railroads Discover Oil, New York, 1952.
MASON GAFFNEY                                                             419

   Milwaukee Journal, November 15, 1964, citing the Appraisal Journal.
35 Thomas O'Hanlon, "The Perilous Prosperity of Anaconda," Fortune, May
   1966, pp. 117—21, 236.
36 Parker vs. Brown, i7 U.S. 34', 63 S. Ct. 307 (1943).
37 Prentice-Hall, Federal Taxes, Englewood Cliffs, 1956.
38 F. J. Reiss, What is a Fair Crop Share Lease? University of Illinois, Circular
   gi8, 1965.
39 Henry Steele, "Comments on Public Policy Problems of the Domestic Crude
   Oil Industry," American Economic Review, 54 (March 1964), pp. 119—25.
40 Philip Stern, The Great Treasury Raid, New York: Random House, 1962.
Appendic
Index
Appendix        Rent Under the Assumption
                of Exhaustibility
                LEWIS C. GRAY




    IN the infancy of economic science rent was distin-
  guished from other forms of income as the periodic
  return from the use of land. And because land itself
  was regarded as one of the great agents in production,
  the existence of a peculiar type of income attributable
  to it appeared particularly suitable.
    This complete correlation between rent as an income
 and land as its source was not destined to continue.
 In the England of the classical school rent was usually
 a form of income which seemed to leave the basis of
 income unimpaired. Year after year the landowner
 might receive a substantial return without decreasing
 the capital value of his investment. It is not strange
 that the imperishability of the basis of rent came to be
 considered an essential characteristic of rent as a form
 of income. It became necessary, therefore, to define
 anew the basis of rent so that it might conform to this
 preconceived essential characteristic of rent itself.
 Accordingly Ricardo modified the economic concept of
 land as the source of a rent payment, and introduced the
   Reprinted by permission of the publishers from the Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, May, 1914.

                                   423
424                                                 Rent and Exhaustibility

assumption that rent is a payment for" the original and
indestructible qualities of the soil." Later writers have
interpreted Ricardo's criterion of land more rigorously
than did Ricardo; and after passing through a process
of gradual refinement, the Ricardian assumption has
been reduced to its extreme form in Professor Commons'
conclusion that the property of extension is the essential
quality which distinguishes land from other kinds of
goods and constitutes the basis of rent.' Thus the
concept of land as the basis of rent has been gradually
reduced to an abstraction.
  A practical man might well ask why it is necessary to
develop an elaborate and peculiar doctrine to explain
the value of the services of natural agents when by very
assumption a large part of natural agents are excluded
from the scope of the explanation. Why must rent be
a payment for an original and indestructible property
in order to be rent? The question is a part of the long
continued dispute as to the desirability of distinguishing
land from capital, and rent from other forms of income.
it is not necessary, however, in this connection, to
wander so far afield. This question may be disregarded
if it can be shown that indestructibility is not a charac-
teristic which separates rent from other forms of income.
The ground will then be clear for a reconsideration of
the rent theory under the assumption of exhaustibility.
  In one sense there is no basis of rent which is im-
perishable. For there is no conceivable basis which
might not lose its utifity, and therefore, its ability to
yield a rent. A change in social demand may cause
even the property of extension to lose the ability to
yield a rent. However, it may be alleged with justice
that the word indestructible has been employed by
     Profee.or M.reh.1I seem. inclined to a similar view, sltho he ha. not come out
unreservedly In It. favor. Principle, of Economic., 5th ed. bk lv, chap. ii, see. I.
LEWIS C. GRAY                                         425

Ricardo and his followers in quite another sense: in
the sense that the use for which rent is paid does not
cause the impairment of the basis of rent. In this
sense the basis of rent may be indestructible. The
clearest illustration is urban land. In the case of agri-
cultural land also it is frequently possible to isolate the
income attributable to the indestructible properties.
When the elements which are exhausted are economi-
cally replaceable, the expense of replacement determines
the value of the exhausted elements; and the remainder
of the total surplus may be considered the rent of the
inexhaustible properties. In many cases, however, it
is not possible to 'isolate the returns assignable to the
indestructible properties. In the case of mines, for in-
tance, it is impossible to separate the value of the
exhausted properties from the value of the inexhaustible
properties. It is easy to determine how much the
capital value of a coal mine is reduced by the process
of use. But this capital value is nothing more than
the present value of the surplus income from the mine
during a period of time, — that is, the present value of
the total rent which it will yield, — and this rent con-
sists of two indistinguishable elements: the return for
the coal used up and the return for the site value of
that coal. A similar impossibility exists in the use of
agricultural land when it is more profitable to exploit
the soil than to conserve it: for instance, under frontier
conditions.
  It seems clear, then, that under the Ricardian assump-
tion rent may be referred to a small part only of the
total category of natural objects. Moreover it is fre-
quently impossible to distinguish rent from the income
of the destructible elements. These facts appear to
justify an attempt to alter the Ricardian statement of
rent in such a way as to avoid the necessity of assum-
426                                 Rent and Exhaustibility

ing that rent is paid only for the "indestructible quali-.
ties of the soil."
   Exhaustion consists either in a change of place or in
a change of form. Coal may be removed from a mine
and continue undestroyed. In this case the exhaustion
is merely relative to a given locality. So far as the
theory of rent is concerned, it is the exhaustion with
reference to a particular locality that is of primary im-
portance whether the valuable elements are absolutely
consumed or merely removed to another location.
   This exhaustion with ref erence to location may be
prevented by restoring other elements of the same kind
in place of those removed in the process of utilization.
Whether or not this is true depends to a large extent
upon economic conditions. For instance, it is physi-
cally possible to restore a forest, but such a restoration
may not pay. It is even physically possible to restore
mineral that has been removed from a mine, but it is
hardly conceivable that it would ever be economical.
Even in the case of agriculture, the experience of the
world has abundantly proven that restoration is fre-
quently unprofitable. In this sense exhaustion may
be characteristic, under certain conditions, of nearly
all natural objects.
   The relation of the assumption of exhaustion to the
theory of rent largely depends upon the possibility of
preventing exhaustion so far as a given locality is con-
cerned. It is necessary, therefore, to consider several
cases which may be presented schematically as follows:
     1. Prevention of exhaustion is economical.
         (a) May be effected without additional expense.
         (b) Requires additional expense.
     2. Prevention of exhaustion is not economical.
   When prevention requires no extra expense, the Ri-
cardian theory is not invalidated by the assumption of
LEWIS C. GRAY                                            427

exhaustion. The entire return attributable to land is
a surplus which accrues so long as the conditions of
demand and supply remain unchanged. Exhaustion
occurs; but the process of restoration is merely inci-
dental to the process of most profitable utilization.
Likewise, the assumption that exhaustion is preventable,
provided it is profitable to incur an extra expense for
that purpose, does not seriously impair the Ricardian
theory of rent. The extra expense either may be con-
sidered a part of the expense incident to the process
of production or may be charged against the land and
deducted from its net return. In both cases the rent,
after all deductions are made, will be the same. The
difference is merely one of accounting.
   In those cases where the prevention of exhaustion is
either impossible or unprofitable, a considerable read-
justment of the rent doctrine is necessary if the assump-
tion of inexhaustibility is to be avoided.
  Tinder the assumption of inexhaustibility land re-
sembles labor in the sense that it perishes through
non-use rather than through use. If it is capable of
furnishing a valuable service year after year, the failure
to utilize it in any year is the source of loss, just as labor
suffers loss from unemployment. When, however, it
is assumed that the benefits that may be derived from
the natural object are exhaustible and non-replaceable,
the point of view is altered. The owner of a valuable
coal deposit, for instance, desires to derive the maximum
benefit from the limited supply which he owns. If for
any reason less benefit can be derived by immediate
removal and sale of the coal than by waiting until some
future time, it may be profitable to postpone utilization.
  The simplest condition that might produce this result
is an expected alteration in the price of coal. If the
price is rising and the prospect is that the rise will
 428                                                     Rent and Exhaustibility

continue, the owner of the mine will find it to his
interest to take out but little coal in the present. This
is true because the resources at his disposal are limited.
Obviously this motive would not exist if the basis of
income were perpetual. Likewise a lowering of the
prices of those factors which enter into the expenses of
production will make profitable a postponement of re-
moval. On the other hand, a decrease of prices of the
product or an increase of the prices of the factors of
expense, in so far as such changes are continuous or
anticipated, will create motives for rapid utilization.
  Outside of mere price change, however, the owner of
the mine will be moved by still more fundamental con-
siderations. One of these considerations is diminishing
productivity.' According to the Ricardian theory of
rent the landowner will find it to his interest to add
units of labor and capital to a given surface of land up
to the point where the last unit applied just equals the
product which might be derived from its employment
on marginal land. In familiar phraseology, labor and
capital are added up to the intensive margin of culti-
vation. According to the theory, such a ratio between
the factors of production will yield the maximum rental
to the landowner, under the given conditions. The
exhaustibility of the natural resource, however, dictates
a different course. The owner of the mine may well
hesitate to proceed beyond the point of maximum aver-
age returns per unit of expense.2 At this rate of removal
the average net return per ton of coal is a maximum,
since the average expense of removal per ton is a mini-
   I This phrase is used to designate the decrease in product which results from the
increase in the expenditure for the other factors of production applied to a given
surface of land.
     In a strict productivity theory of distribution it would be necessary to continue
the comparison of the units of labor and capital instead of substituting units of expense.
since the latter assume the determination of the value of labor and capital.        In the
consideration of the policy of a single entrepreneur, however, it need not be seriously
inaccurate to employ the more convenient and more easily illustrated idea of expense.
LEWIS C. GRAY                                                              429

mum. The attempt to appropriate the coal more
rapidly results in a diminishing product per unit of
expense and, therefore, a diminishing average net return
per ton of coal. Were the mine owner influenced by
no other consideration, his interest would demand that
no more coal be removed at any time than can be re-
moved at a minimum average expense per ton. If he
is willing to wait for the return from his coal, he can
postpone for future removal all coal over and above
that amount which can be removed at a minimum
average expense per ton.
  The point may be illustrated by the accompanying
table, which shows the results of removing various
quantities of coal from a mine during a definite period
of time — one year. It is assumed for convenience that
each ton of coal is worth $1.00; so that the same
figures represent both the quantity and the value of
the product.
                                  TABLE I
   Variations in the Net Return in the Removal of Varljing Quantitiee
                    of Coal in a Given Period of Time

                                                                Net return of
                                                      Increase each addition.l
             Value    Expense              Average  ID OXZ)flS 100 tone after
Quantity                          Total       net
 of coal     of coal of removal    net               due to the the point of
                                            returns removal
removed    removed per 100                                   of
  (tons)    (dollars)    tons     return
                                           1er       each addl maximum
                                                      100 tons
                                                                          net
                                                                 returns per
                                                                   100 tons

   100        100      $120       —$20     —$20         ...          ...
  200        200        100         00       00         ...          ...
  300        300          80        60       20         ...          ...
  400        400          50       200       50         ...          ...
  500        500          52       240       ...       $60          $40
  600        600          55       270       ...        70           30
  700        700          59       287       ...        83           17
  800        800          64       288       ...        99             1
  900        900          68       288       ...       100             0
 1000       1000          73       270       ...       ...           ...
 1100       1100          79       231       ...       ...           ...
 430                                                     Rent and Exhaustibility

    The figures in the table show that the minimum
average expense per ton is achieved by taking out 400
tons of coal during the year. If more than this amount
is removed, each ton will yield a smaller net return than
if its removal is postponed until it may be effected at
the minimum expense. Were the mine an inexhaust-
ible basis of income, there would be no necessity for
solicitude on account of the fact that each ton yields
less than a possible maximum. The interest of the
owner would dictate the extraction of eight hundred
tons of coal. At this point the value of an additional
one hundred tons just equals the expense of its removal.
    It is necessary to turn aside for a moment to cOn-
sider certain confusions which are involved in the con-
cepts of diminishing productivity and diminishing
returns as applied to mines.
  Some writers have denied that a mine is subject to
the law of diminishing productivity. Altho admitting
that the extension of mining to other fields as well as
to lower depths may be subject to diminishing return,
Professor Marshall appears to deny the diminishing
productivity which results from an attempt to accel-
erate the process of extraction by an increased appli-
cation of the other factors of production to a given
surface. He compares a mine to a reservoir. "The
more nearly a reservoir is exhausted," he says, " the
greater is the labor of pumping from it: but if one man
could pump it out in ten days, ten men could pump
it out in one day, and when empty, it would yield no
more." ' It is not denied that the physical possibility
suggested by Marshall may occur in some cases. The
probability, however, of an indefinite acceleration of the
rate of removal without incurring an increased expense
     Principles of Economics, bk. iv, chap. iii, section 7. J. S. Mill expressed a similar
opinion, but more guardedly, with respect to collieries and other such surface deposit..
but not with respect to ordinary mines. Principles, bk. iii, chap. v, section 3.
LEWIS C. GRAY                                         431

per unit of result appears to be very unlikely in ordi-
nary circumstances. Even in the case of surface de-
posits, such as those of the Mesabi Range, the attempt
to remove the entire surface supply in a very short
period would entail a much larger investment in fixed
capital than would be necessary over a longer period.
In the case of mines where the sinking of shafts is neces-
sary, an increase of the rate of utilization must often
mean the sinking of an increased number of shafts and
the provision of a more elaborate equipment than would
be required for a lengthier period of extraction. It
appears fairly safe to assume that, as a general rule to
which there may be certain exceptions, the law of
diminishing productivity is applicable to mining as well
as to agriculture.
   It must be clearly understood that the term diminish-
ing productivity as employed above has been used in
the sense in which Ricardo used it; that is, with regard
to successive applications of labor and capital to a
given surface of land. The conclusion that the owner
of a mine may stop short of the point where the last
unit of expenditure just equals its product constitutes
an exception to the modern productivity theory only
when the quantity of land is measured by surface.
After the quantity of coal to be removed has been de-
termined, the ordinary statement of the productivity
theory is applicable. In the removal of that coal ex-
penditures will be profitable so long as an additional
outlay facilitates the process of removal to a sufficient
extent to justify the expenditure.
  The influence of the rate of interest has thus far been
disregarded. It is obvious, however, that the ten-
dency for the owner of the mine to postpone for future
removal all coal which would otherwise have to be
removed at an increased average expense per ton is
     432                                               Rent and Exhaustibility

   counteracted by the fact that the present value of the
   return from future removal is lessened by the discount
   on the future. The net return from each ton removed
   in the present, even at an increased expense, may be
   greater than the present value of the same coal removed
   at minimum expense in the future. The basis of com-
   parison, of course, beyond the point of maximum aver-
   age net returns must be the net return from the removal
   of an additional quantity of coal (columns six and
   seven of table one), not the average net return.
                                       TABLE II
     Present Values of the Net Returns Derived from the Removal of Various
          Quantities of Coal at Different Future Periods with Interest at
                                  Ten Per Cent

                  No. lat
 Preaent Value of Tons           2d      3d      4th     5th     6th     7th     8th
                       Yr.      Year    Year    Year    Year    Year    Year    Year
The maximum
  average net re-    400   $50145.45 $41.66 + $38.46 +135.71 +133.33 +131.25 + 129.41 +
  turn per lOOtons
Net return of each   500   40 36.36 + 33.33 + 30.76 + 28.57 + 26.66 + 25.00 23.52 +
  additional 100 600       30 27.27 + 25.00 23.07 + 21.42 + 20.00 18.75 17.84 +
  tons               700   17 15.45+ 14.16+ 13.07+ 12.14+ 11.33+ 10.62+ iO.00
                     800
                     900
                            1
                            0
                                 .90+
                                   0
                                         .83+1
                                          0
                                               .76+
                                                 0
                                                         .71+
                                                          0
                                                              .66+
                                                                0
                                                                   .62+           .58+
                                                                                    0
                                                                           0,



      Table II illustrates the theoretical method of deter-
    mining the rate of utilization as a resultant of the two
    antagonistic factors: diminishing productivity and the
    discount on the returns from future removal (assumed
    to be ten per cent). If the total quantity of coal to be
    removed under the assumed conditions is only twelve
    hundred tons, there is no reason for the mine owner to
    remove more than four hundred tons a year; for the
    present value of the net return of the last four hundred
    tons removed in the third year is $41.66, whereas the
    removal of an additional one hundred tons in the first
    year will yield a net return of only forty dollars. If
LEWIS C. GRAY                                          433

the entire quantity of coal is 3,700 tons, the owner of
the mine will find it desirable to remove six hundred
tons in the present; for the sixth hundred tons could not
be removed at any time in the future so as to yield a
greater net return than thirty dollars. If postponed
until the eighth year, the present value of the net re-
turn is only $29.41.
  In the theory thus far presented, certain conditions
have been left out of account for the sake of simplicity.
In the first place, it is assumed, with Ricardo, that the
landlord has the option of leasing the land to others or
of using it himself. This assumes, of course, that
the landlord will so adjust the contract in case of a
lease that the mine will yield the maximum rent which
might be derived from his own utilization. The limi-
tations of this assumption need not be further con-
sidered here.
   In the second place, the ideal rate of utilization illus-
trated above implies operation on a large scale in the
first year, with a decline in the magnitude of operation
in successive years. It will be necessary to employ a
larger amount of fixed capital in the first year than in
successive years. A part of this fixed capital provided
for the larger scale of operation in the first year will be
wasted. It will, therefore, pay for the entrepreneur
to adjust his rate of removal so that the rate of utiliza-
tion will be more nearly uniform. This rate will be
somewhere between the two extremes represented by the
maximum rate of utilization in the first year and the
minimum utilization of the last year. A third modifi-
cation is made necessary by the fact that in the above
consideration of the economic rate of utilization sub-
stantially constant returns were assumed. No allow-
ance was made for the possibility that the removal of
coal in the first year may change entirely the condi-
434                                                     Rent and Exhaustibility

tions of removal in the second year. The removal of
the 400 tons may have exposed coal which is not only
of a better quality but also capable of being removed at
less expense per ton than the coal removed during the
first year. On the other hand, the deposit made
accessible by the removal of the 400 tons may be of
an inferior quality and so situated that the average
expense of removal per ton will be greater than for
removal in the first year. This may be true because
of greater depth or special difficulties encountered, such
as water or gas or the thinness of the vein of coal. In
short, mining is subject either to the law of increasing
returns or to the law of diminishing returns or to both
tendencies alternately according to conditions.'
   The assumption of decreasing returns would not affect
the above conclusions. The owner of the mine would
have no motive to accelerate the rate of removal of his
coal simply to get access to the less profitable coal
at lower depths. Under the assumption of increas-
ing returns, however, a more rapid removal in the
present might be justified by the fact that the larger
net returns from the mine are in the future and are
subject to the discount. With this modification the
principles of utilization as above outlined will continue
applicable.
  The influence of differences in the price of the product
has thus far been disregarded. In an earlier part of
this paper the effect of changing prices was discussed.
The influence of higher or lower price levels must now
be considered.
  It should be noted that, were there no discount on
the future, a higher price level would not necessarily
change the economic rate of utilization. It might still
   1 Ricardo bclieved the law of dimilliahing return ia normally characteristic of mining.
Principles of Political Economy, chap. iii. On the poaaibiity of increasing returns, of.
Tsu.mg, Principles of Economics, vol. ii, p. 95.
LEWISC.GRAY                                                                   435

be economical to extract the coal at the point of maxi-
mum average net returns per unit of coal, as determined
by the physical conditions of appropriation and the
expense of the other factors.
                                    TABLE III
     Variations in the Net Return of Varljing Quantities of Coal in a
          Given Period of Time (Price of Coal $2.00 Per Ton)

                                                       Increase
                                                       in expense
                                                      due to re-
                        Average                                   Net return of
                                              Acerage moval of each
 Quantity     Value     expense      Total       net  each add'l       additional
  of coal    of coal   of remov-       net    returns 100 tons   100 tons beyond
 removed    removed    al per 100    return                        the point of
                                              per 100 beyond the maximum
   (tons)                tons                   tons   point of              av.
                                                      maximum      net returns
                                                        av. net
                                                        returns

   100       $200        $120         $80      $80        ...           ...
   200        400         100         200      100         ...          ...
   300        600           80        360      120         ...          ...
   400        800           50        600      150         ...          ...
   500       1000           52        744)     148          60         140
   600       1200           55        870      145          71         130
   700       1400           59        987      141         83          117
   800       1600           64       1088      136         99          101
   900       1800           68       1188      132        100          100
  1000       2000           73       1270      127        118           82
  1100       2200           79       1331      121        139           61
  1200       2400           87       1356      113        175           25
  1300       2600          96        1352      104        204            —4
  144)0      2800         106        1316        94       236          —36



   This point is illustrated in Table III, which is similar
to Table I, except that the price of coal is doubled. The
difference between the average net returns per hundred
tons remains the same. The effect of the rise of price
is merely to add one hundred dollars to the net return
per hundred tons in every case no matter what the
quantity removed. The point of maximum net returns
is not changed.
      436                                              Rent and Exhaustibility

         Altho a higher level of prices does not necessarily
      compel a change in the rate of utilization when there is
      no discount on the future, such a discount will affect
      the relative merits of present and future removal, and,
      therefore, the rate of utilization. For under the higher
      prices the magnitude of the net return per hundred
      tons, both in present and in future, is increased by the
      same amount. Because of the increase in the amount
      of the net return the discount of the net return for a
      future use will result in a larger deduction in arriving
      at present value than before the rise of price. Conse-
      quently the future use will be relatively less desirable
      than its competing present use.
                                     TABLE IV
       Present Values of the Net R,eturne derived from the R,emoval of Various
        Quantities of Coal at Different Periods with Interest at Ten Per Cent
                            (Price of Coal S2.OO Per Ton)

                  No. lat
 Preaent Value of Tons        2d       3d        4th      5th      6th      7th    8th
                       Yr.    Year    Year      Year     Year     Year     Year   Year
The maximum
 average net Ta-    400*150 8136.38+$125.00   8115.38+ $107.14+ *ioo.oo   $93.75 888.23+
 turnaperlOOtons
Preeent value of     500 140 127.27+ 118.88+ 107.69+ 100.00       93.33+ 87.50 82.35+
 the net return      600 130 118.18+ 108.33+ 100.00   92.85+      86.68+ 81.25 76.46+
 from each addI-     700 117 106.38 + 97:50+ 90.00
 tional lOOtons..    800 101 91.81± 84.16+ 77.69+ 83.57     +     78.00  73.12 + 68.82 +
                     900 100 90.90+ 83.33+ 76.92+ 72.14+
                                                      71.42+1
                                                                  67.33+ 63.12+ 59.41+
                                                                  66.66+ 82.50 58.82+
                    1000 82 74.54+ 68.33+ 63.07+ 58.57+1          54.86+ 51.25 48.23+
                    1100 61 55.45+ 50.83+ 46.92+ 43.52+1          40.66+ 38.12+ 35.88+
                    12001 25 22.72+ 20.83+ 19.23+ 17.85+1         16.66+ 15.62+ 14.70+


        This point is illustrated in Table IV, in which all the
      conditions are the same as in Table II except that the
      price of the product is doubled. At the original price
      of one dollar per ton the difference in the net return of
      the fifth one hundred tons in the present, as compared
      with the present value of the net return per hundred
      tons when four hundred tons is removed one year from
      the present, amounts to $5.45 in favor of the latter.
LEWIS C. GRAY                                        47
When the price of coal is doubled, this difference dis-
appears and the balance is in favor of the fifth hundred
tons removed in the present. For the net return in
the latter case amounts to $140, while the present value
of the net return per hundred tons derived from the
removal of four hundred tons in the second year is
only $136.36. If the mine owner has 3,700 tons of
coal subject to the assumed conditions of Table IV,
he will derive maximum returns from the entire quan-
tity by adjusting his margin of utilization as indicated
by the dotted line in Table IV, which shows a more
rapid rate of removal than under the lower price. (See
Table II.)
  Altho the influence of an increase of price is in
the same direction as under the Ricardian theory, the
intensive margin cannot fall so far that the product
and expense on the margin just coincide, as under the
Ricardian theory. For, however long the period of
utilization may be and however large the discount on
the future may become, the net return from the removal
of coal at the point of time most remote in the future
can never be reduced to zero. Hence, in theory, the
competition of this surplus over expense which is mar-
ginal in time must always be great enough to prevent
the coincidence of product and expense on the intensive
margin of present utilization.
 If we turn from the consideration of the conditions
which determine the intensive margin of utilization to
those which determine the extensive margin, the altera-
tion in assumption with regard to exhaustibility does
not greatly change the Ricardian formula. It is likely
that an extension of the margin will occur whenever
such an extension is sufficient to repay the expense of
removal. Aitho there will be a surplus on the in-
tensive margin, there will be no surplus on the extensive
438                                                     Rent and Exhaustibility

margin.     It has been suggested that while the exten-
sive margin yields no rent, it may yield a royalty: that
is, a return to cover the value of the mineral extracted.t
It will be apparent from the above analysis that this
cannot be true theoretically. The value of the coal is
due to the fact that it yields a net return above the
expense of extracting it: that is, the value is a result
of the rent. In order that the coal in situ may have a
value, the conditions of utilization must be such that
the coal may be extracted and sold in the present at an
expense sufficiently low to yield a surplus. For,
except when the mine is subject to increasing returns
as lower depths are reached, or unless prices are ex-
pected to change, it is impossible that future uses may
yield a surplus unless conditions are such as to yield
a surplus in the present. Hence the coal in the mine
on the margin which yields no rent, except in the cases
above-noted, has no value which could be made the
basis of a charge for depreciation. In the case of ex-
haustible natural objects above the margin of utiliza-
tion the Ricardian doctrine of rent is characterized by
much confusion. Ricardo first sought to rule out all
payments for minerals and timber from the category of
rent. In the chapter "On Rent" he criticizes Adam
Smith very severely for the assertion that the demand
for timber and its consequent high price in the more
southern countries of Europe, caused a rent to be paid
for forests in Norway, which could before afford no
      Notably. Professor Sorley in an article on mine royalties, published in the Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society forMarch, 1889; Marshall, A., Pnnclplea of Economics.
5th ed, p. 439, note; and Flux, A. W., Economic Principles. pp. 108-109. In his
recently published Principles of Economics. Professor Taussig questions the assump-
tion that marginal mines would beat a royalty charge even tho yielding no rent surplus.
Profeseor Tauseig does not attempt to prove his point. Professor Sorley base. his
position upon the argument that a landowner of a mineral depoeit which is marginal
must h*ve some inducement to compensate for the necessity of incurring the bad
reput. of his neighbors on account of the fact that a mine is an unpopular institution.
This is a question of fact which need not be discussed here.
LEWIS C. GRAY
                                                       439

rent.   "Is it not, however, evident," says Ricardo,
"that the person who paid what he thus calls rent,
paid it in consideration of the valuable commodity
which was then standing on the land, and that he actu-
ally repaid himself with a profit, by the sale of the
timber? . . . in the case stated by Adam Smith, the
compensation was paid for the liberty of removing and
selling the timber, and not for the liberty of growing it.
He speaks also of the rent of coal mines, and of stone
quarries, to which the same observation applies
that the compensation given for the mine or quarry is
paid for the value of the coal or stone which can be
removed from them, and has no connection with the
original and indestructible powers of the land." 1
  Strangely enough, in the next chapter Ricardo de-
velops a new doctrine. He appears to disregard
entirely his previous positive denial that the return to
mines or forests is to be classed as rent. His treatment
of the subject is a mere extension of his previous dis-
cussion of agricultural rent without modification.
"Mines," he says, "as well as land, generally pay a
rent to their owner, and this rent, as well as the rent
of land, is the effect, and never the cause of the high
value of their produce. . . . The metal produced
from the poorest mine that is worked must at least
have an exchangeable value, not only sufficient to pro-
cure all the clothes, food, and other necessaries con-
sumed by those employed in working it, and bringing
the produce to market, but also to afford the common
and ordinary profits to him who advances the stock
necessary to carry on the undertaking. The return
for capital paying no rent would regulate the rent of
all the other more productive mines. This mine is
supposed to yield the usual profits of stock. All that
                 ' P,inciplei, obap. ii, eeotion 24,
44°                                                  Rent and Exhaustibility

the other mines produce more than this will necessarily
be paid to the owners for rent." 1 Nowhere in his
book does Ricardo make an attempt to explain the
apparent contradiction. In fact, the law of mine rent
as stated in chapter three is several times reasserted and
illustrated, especially the point that the entire net
return from a mine is rent.2
  Later writers have tried to harmonize the two antag-
onistic principles developed by Ricardo, by combining
them. It has become customary to recognize that the
return imputed to a mineral deposit consists of two
parts: a rent and a royalty. This plausible doctrine
has been maintained by so many writers that it is de-
sirable to devote considerable attention to it.
  The essential fallacy of this explanation of mine rent
lies in the fact that the so-called royalLy is nothing
more than a depreciation charge which results from
capitalizing a terminable series of incomes. A little
attention to Böhm-Bawerk's illustration of the nature
of the income from durable goods would have shown
clearly that the current distinction between rent and
royalty is not sound. BOhm-Bawerk has shown that
when the succession of incomes is regarded as inter-
minable, the present value of the most remote in time
is nothing. The income in the present is all regarded
as interest. 'When, however, the successive prospective
incomes are terminable, the present income is divided
into two parts: that is, from the entire net income in
the present is subtracted the present value of that por-
ticn of the income whose accrual is most remote in time.
The remainder is interest; the subtrahend is a depre-
ciation fund, or charge. It is this depreciation fund
    I Principles. chap. iii, section 32.
    I Notably in the discussion of the rent of woodland, chap. xii; in the chapter CB-
titled ' Taxes on Gold         and in chap. xxiv.
    $ The Positive Theory of Capital (Smart Translation), bk. vi. chap.. vu and viii.
 LEWIS C. GRAY
                                                                                    441

 which has been called a royalty. In short, the royalty
 is the product of the process of capitalization. The
 business man, unconcerned with socially valid distinc-
 tions between rent and interest but desirous of keeping
 intact his fund of capital, chargesto depreciation the
 amount by which the total value of the mine or farm
 has been reduced by utilization.'
  To consider that the amount which is left in the pres-
ent after the subtraction of the amount of depreciation
is determined by the law of rent is to confuse the
process of capitalization of a rent surplus with the
conditions which determine rent itself. This amount
which is regarded as the economic rent of the mine, as
distinguished from the so-called royalty, is obviously a
quantity which varies with every change in the rate of
interest and with the degree of remoteness of exhausti-
bility. The true rent, indeed, in the present is not
simply this amount; rather it is the whole surplus as
determined by the difference between the gross product
in the present and the expenses of production.2 It
may be said that there can be no objection to calling
this depreciation fund a royalty. This is true. The
objection lies in applying the term rent to the residuum
after the subtraction of the so-called royalty from the
total net return. For the actual amount of this so-
called rent is not determined in amount by the condi-
tions which give rise to a surplus over the expense of
utilizing natural agents. It is determined mainly by
     Mr. J. A. Finlay, a New York mining expert employed by the State of Michigan
to appraise the mines of the state for purposes of taxation has recently used this method
of capitalization in the valuation of Michigan mines. An account of the appraisal is
published by Mr. Finlay in the Engineering and Mining Journal for September 9, 1911,
p. 488.
     In the article on mine royalties already referred to, Professor Sorley recognizes
the identity of rent and royalty so far as mines above the margin are concerned.
Aa already pointed out, he attempts to show the existence of the royalty in the case
of marginal mines. Professor Sorley does not attempt to explain the nature of this
royalty.
442                                 Rent and Exhaustibility

the process of capitalizing such a surplus. Only in-
directly is the surplus responsible for the size of this
pseudo-rent, as the whole may limit the size of its parts.
Inasmuch as the removal of all coal in the present,
beyond the point of maximum net returns per unit of
coal, is subject to the competition of future uses; it
might be considered that the value of all coal extracted
beyond this point is subject to an opportunity cost
measured by the present value of the net return which
would be derived from the coal if extraction were post-
poned until the future. Even this opportunity cost
does not represent a value of coal in addition to the
rent surplus; for the entire surplus in the present is
none the less a real surplus merely because a smaller
return in the future could be derived from the same
coal by postponement of utilization.
  The relation of mine rents to price has naturally been
the subject of much confusion. Generally speaking,
modern writers who have given attention to this sub-
ject have taken the position that royalties "enter into
price" although the so-called rent of the mine does not.
This position is maintained on the ground that the
royalty is a capital fund which must be remunerated in
order to induce the owner of the mine to employ it
productively.
  It is now generally recognized that the old idea that
rent does not "enter into pride" does not imply that
rent may not be a determinant of relative prices. The
question, then, of the relation of royalties and of rents
amounts to this: are they forms of income which are
disposable? If they were partly or entirely taken by
taxation, would the supply of land be decreased?
  In this sense a royalty may "enter into price" under
certain conditions, and under other conditions it may
not enter into price; but in no case is its relation to
LEWIS C. GRAY
                                                      443

price attributable to the fact that the royalty is capital
which must be replaced. The entire pseudo-rent and
nearly all the royalty might be taken without causing
the mine to fall below the margin of utilization. For,
since the royalty itself is a part of the total surplus,
the owner would be foolish to abandon his mine so long
as any surplus is obtainable. What will happen is
that the residuum of the old royalty will be recapitalized
and divided into a new royalty, and a new rent. The
actual amount of each will be determined by the condi-
tions of capitalization.
   It does not follow, however, that a tax on the mine
will in no way affect the supply of the product placed
on the market in the present. Such a tax may disturb
the relation between present and future. It has been
shown that the tendency is for the rate of utilization
to be so adjusted that the present value of the marginal
uses in present and in future are just in balance. Much,
therefore, will depend on the manner in which the tax
is applied.
   An annual tax on the value of the mine, provided the
tax is expected to be permanent, will increase the ten-
dency for the mine owner to remove the coal in the
present rather than in the future. For, since the mine
must pay the tax as long as it is operated, the tax may
be evaded by increasing the rapidity of exhaustion.
This wifi be true even if all of the so-called rent and a
part of the royalty is taken by the tax. Far from pre-
venting the mine from being utilized, it will actually
increase the amount of coal placed on the market;
and if demand is constant,, will probably lower price..
   On the other hand a tax upon the annual surplus
from the operation of the mine, even if it is so heavy
as to take more than the pseudo-rent, will not create
an inducement for the mine owner to alter the adjust-
444                                 Rent and Exhaustibility

ment of utilization between present and future.         If
the rate of extraction is already adjusted upon the most
profitable basis, nothing will be gained by postponing
until the future, coal that will yield a greater net re-
turn in the present. For the tax can be avoided only
to the extent that the surplus return is reduced, and
the loss in surplus must always be greater than the
saving in the tax. The effect of such a tax is to take
a certain share of each dollar of surplus whenever it
appears, whether in the present or future. The tax
can only be evaded by losing that part of the dollar
which remains. This is true on the assumption that
the tax is regarded as permanent. Of course, in any
case, if the tax is regarded a merely temporary, the
tendency will be to transfer as much as possible of the
process of production to the future.
  In the case of a tonnage tax consisting of a fixed
amount per ton, the balance of motive between present
and future will probably be affected in such a way as
to encourage a slower rate of utilization, and the post-
ponement of a greater amount of coal for future extrac-
tion. If, previous to the levying of the tax, the marginal
net return from coal to be extracted in the present is
in equal balance with the present value of the marginal
net return from future uses, the tax will reduce the
net return of a given quantity of coal which is on the
margin of utilization in the future less than it will
reduce the net return in the present. This is true
simply because the future tax is discounted. For in-
stance, suppose that the marginal present use yields a
net return per ton of one dollar while a competitive
future use twenty years from the present will yield a
net return of two dollars per ton, the present worth
of which is one dollar (assuming a discount at five per
cent). A tax of ten cents per ton will leave the net
LEWISC.GRAY                                          445

returns of present and future ninety cents and one
dollar ninety cents respectively. The present value
of the future coal, however, is ninety-five cents instead
of ninety cents, indicating the probability that a lower
rate of utilization will be adopted.
  The consideration of the incidence of taxes on mines
makes clear the fact that the royalty is not a necessary
part of supply price. The entire rent and part of the
royalty may be taken without affecting supply provided
it is done in such a manner that the relation between
the net returns from present and future production are
not disturbed.
   It will now be apparent that of the two solutions
which Ricardo applied to the problem, the idea that
the rent of a mine or forest comprises the entire sur-
plus above the expenses of production is the more
nearly correct explanation. At the same time, Ricardo
was not justified in extending his theory of rent to
exhaustible natural agents without modification, espe-
cially when the rent-bearer is exhaustible and non-
restorable. For the location of the internal margin of
utilization is determined by the competition of present
and future uses rather than by the coincidence between
product and expense. Consequently the rate of in-
terest exercises an important influence in determining
the location of the internal margin. On the other hand,
the price level of the product has substantially the same
influence upon the rate of utilization as under the Ricar-
dian assumptions. Moreover, there is no alteration in
the method of determining the extensive margin; aitho,
when the comparison is between surfaces, the intensive
margin does not coincide with the extensive margin.
  These modifications do not necessarily nullify the
conventional statement that rent is the difference
between the product of a given amount of labor and
446                               Rent and Exhaustibility

capital applied to good land in the most profitable way
and the product of an equal amount of labor and capital
applied to marginal land. It is only necessary to give a
special interpretation, as above, to the phrase "in the
mo8t profitable way." However, the traditional division
of the net return from exhaustible natural resources
into a rent and a royalty is justified only as a method
of capitalization. The real economic rent of such
resources comprises the entire net return from the rent-
bearer, including the so-called royalty.
            Index



Allowable system. See Prorationing                 grades of ore, 78—81; and prices, 82—84;
Amortization: reserves for, 355—58                 accidental, 82—83; and taxation, 293,
Appreciation: of undiscovered minerals,            326, 374—81; acquisition of rights
   380—86                                          through, 317,       391—92; and external-
Appropriation principle, 338, 391—92               ities, 319, 320; value of, 326; depletion,
                                                   327. See Depletion allowances, discov-
Bid-appraisal ratio, 142—43, 146—49                ery-value depletion
Bidder futility: definition of, '5'; sources     Discovery rate: optimal, 272, 273, 286, 381—
  of, in lumber industry, 151—53; and cap-         i; effect of taxes on, 277—80, 281—86,
  ital-gains tax, 153—54                           285, 374—81; overmotivation of, 391—99;
                                                   preclusive, 393—95; public contribution,
Capital gains: and equity, 299; historical         395—96; and credit rationing, 396—97;
  basis of, 325, 326                               and management aggrandizement, 397
Capital-gains tax: 325, 326; on timber,          Distribution of income: and North Da-
   153—54; and bidder futility, 153—54             kota oil policy, 289—94; and equity, 296,
Capital recovery: and percentage deple-            297; and taxation, 297
  tiOn, 325—27; and life of reserves, 355—58
Carlisle, Donald, 42, 43, 45                     Enclosure movement, 112—13
Chile: mine-tax policies, 201                    Expensing: 256, 269—7 1, 324, 327,400-402;
Conservation, 271—73, 286. See also Ex-            effects on tax rate, 271, 281—85; effects
  traction rate, optimal; Discovery rate,          on extraction rate, 278, 280, 286; effects
  optimal                                          on discovery rate, 281—86; and equity,
Consumer sovereignty, 333—34                       299; of developmental and exploratory
                                                   outlays, 324, 325, 327, 329
Davidson, Paul, 383, 410                         Exploitation. See Depletion
Depletion: definition of, 63, 223; and vary-     Exploitation rate. See Extraction rate
  ing grades of ore, 74—77; valuation of,        Exploration. See Discovery
  361—64; and theory of rent, 371—72, 426—       External diseconon)ies and economies.
  27, 441; and cost changes, 427—28                See Externalities
Depletion allowances: 324—30 passim; and         Externalities: 301, 302, 306—7, 313, 330;
  output, '; and allocation of resources,          and North Dakota oil, 290; and extrac-
  192; policy of, for shale oil, 192, 251;         tion rate, 319; and exploration deci-
  and taxes, 251; percentage depletion,            sions, 319, 32O and special taxation 327,
  269—71, 278, 280—86, 324, 326, 327; dis-         328
  covery-value depletion, 324, 326, 327;         Extraction. See Depiction
  defenses of, 328; reforms of, 328, 329,        Extraction rate: constancy of, 26; and
  330; and acquisition costs, 330; and re-         plant size, 28, 58—60; and diminishing
  serve-output ratio, 361—64                       returns, 29, 434; optimal, 31, 32—33,
Depletion rate. See Extraction rate                272—77, 286, 315—16, 347—53, 443; and
Discovery: costs of, 77—78; and varying            interest rate, 3 1—32, 56—57, 67, 432 and

                                           447
  448                                                                             Index

 product price changes, 33, 320—2 1, 434—       nuses for, 21—22, 188—94, 248—49, 411
 37; and quasi-rent, 34; and user Cost,         and shale oil, 176, 187—94 passim; and
 34—39 passisn; tentatively chosen rate,        risk, i85, 248—49
 36—39 passim; and changing resources,        Life-index, See Reserve-output ratio
 41—45, 46—47; and Changing wages and         Linear programming: as a tool of impu-
 prices, 47—55, 8; and taxation, 55—56,         tation, 16—17
 69, 70, 245—5 1 passim, 277—80, 286, 290—    Longevity: economies of, 35o—51; and size
 91, 322—30 passin, 364—67, 443—45; and         of firm, 358—6 1
 quantity of deposits, 68; and cost Lumber industry: and market structures,
 changes, 68—69, 321, 322 and demand            135—36, 139, 141—47, iso; and timber
 changes, 70—72; and varying grades of          ownership, 14(1, 15(1—51; and selling pro-
  ore, 74—77; and control models, 91—105        cedures, 142; and bidder futility, 151—
 passznz; and resource control, 119, 121;       54; and taxation, 153—54
 and monopolies, 245; and number of oil
 wells, 275, 277; and prorationing, 291;      Market structure: of iron industry, 119—
 and security, 311; and imperfect owner-        31 passim; of molybdenum industry,
 ship, 316—18; and tenure, 317; and risk,       131—32; of nickel industry, 132—34; of
 317, 318; and externalities, 319; and re-      lumber industry, 135—36, 193, 141—47,
 serve-output ratio, 347—53; and dimin-         15o; of gypsum industry, 136; and ex-
  ishing productivity, 430—3 1                  traction rate, 245; and income taxes,
                                                253; and vertical integration, 358—61;
Fisheries: optimization conditions in,          and property taxes, 405—8; and public
  159—62; and factor mobility, 162—63;          policy, 407—9
  and license fees, 164—65, i66; and excess   Marshall, Alfred, 25—28 passirn, 237—38,
  capacity, 165                                 430
                                              Maximum physical yield, as an optimum,
Gypsum industry, reserves and market             157—58, 35on
  structure of, 136                           Mineral Leasing Act, 176, 187
                                              Molybdenum industry: concentration of
Imputation, 11—22 paSsiin                       ownership in, mgi; reserves and market
Income tax: 322, 324; and shale oil, ig;        structure of, 131—32
  and allocation of resources, 252, 253,
  265, 281—85; shifting of, 252, 254; and     Neighborhood effects. See Externalities
  efficiency, 253; and monopolies, 253;       Nickel industry: 132—34; reserves and
  and exports, 253; and unemployment,          market Structure of, 134
  253; and equity, 253, 254; and risk, 253,   North Dakota oil policy: 289—94; and dis-
  265; and extraction rate, 277—80, 285,         tribution of income, 289, 290; and ex-
  324; and discovery rate, 280—85; and           ploitation rate, 290—gm; impact on state
  exploration decisions, 326; See also De-       revenues, 291, 292
  pletion allowances; Taxes
Iron ore, reserves and market structures,     Output rate. See Extraction rate
  119—31 passim                               Ownership of resources: and market
                                                 power, 119—37 passim; and shale oil,
Kahn, Alfred, 145n, 398—99, 41(1—11, 416         174—77, 186—87, 192, 193, 194; ifl
                                                 lumber industry, 140, 150—51; foreign,
Lane, K. F., 43—44                               202; and efficiency, 3o1; concentration
Latin America, mine taxation in, 197—2 15        of, 310, 311 and extraction rate, 316—
  passini                                        i8; by government. 408—9
Leases: and prorationing, 20—2 i; and
  product price changes, 20—21; and im-        Paley Commission, 92—93
  port quotas; i; bidding for, i; bo-          Percentage depletion: 269—71; effects on
INDEX
                                                                                       449
  tax rate, 27', 281—85; effects on extrac-    Self-sufficiency ratio, 120—37 passirn
  tion rate, 278, 280, 286; effects on dis-    Severance tax: 322, 323; on shale oil, 190,
  covery rate, 281—85; effects on inter-         sgi; and allocation of resources, 191,
  industry allocation of resources, 284;         247; types of, 246, 247; and price
  and capital recovery, 325—27                   changes, 246, 247; and extraction rates,
Petroleum industry, 269—87 passins               246, 247, 251, 252, 265, 322; on North
Property taxes: 322, 323, 324; and mono-         Dakota oil, 289—92
  polists, 245; and extraction rate, 245,      Shale oil: resources in the U.S., 170—71;
  265; 369—72; and liquidity problems,           and petroleum import policy, 171, i8;
  323; and elasticity of investments, 324;       production costs of, 171—74; ownership
  and prospecting, 364—67, 372—73; 402—8;        of, 174—77, 182—86, 192, 193, 194; leasing
  and competition, 405—8                         of, 176, 187—94, asszm; and tax policies,
Prorationing: and leases, 20, i; and oil         178, '90—92; extraction rate of, 179—80,
  production, 20, i; and extraction rate,        ig; and quasi-rents, 179, i8o; and ex-
  290—9s, 329; differential effects of, 291;     ternalities, 180—82, '94; and risk, 184—
  and price maintenance, gi; and explo-          86; and parcel size, 187, '94; and royal-
  ration, 291; and inflation of capital re-      ties, 188—94 possins; and lease bonuses,
  quirements, 358                                188—94 passim; taxation of, 190-92
                                               Site-value tax. See Property taxes; Taxes,
Quasi-rents, 34, 179, s8o, 233—65 frassun        and economic rent
                                               Staggering: 342—46; and value of deple-
Racing for reserves, 360—61, 39 1—95             tion, 344; and size of firm, 358—61
Regalian principle, 203
Renewal rate. See Discovery rate               Taxes: and economic rent, xv—xvii, 235,
Rent: 233—65 passim; and depletion, 4—so,        236, 292—94, 364—67, 399—409; and ex-
  220, 343—46, 355—56, 361—64, 371—72,           traction rate, s—6, 280—86; and con-
  426—27, 441; history of, 198; and taxes,       trol models, 91—105 passirn; in fisheries,
  199, 205, 292—94, 399—409; concepts of,        164; of mines in Latin America, 197—
  207, 423—26, 440—42, 445—46; and politi-       215 passirn; and foreign ownership, 202;
  cal turbulence, 211—52; and returns on         roles of, 2o5; transitions between sys-
  capital, 236; share of, 409—13; and value,     tems of, 23', 373—74, 402, 406—7; and effi
  425, 438—40
                                                 ciency, 234; and incentives, 244; neu-
Reserve-output ratio: of steel firms, 120—
                                                 trality of, 254, 273, 322, 364—69; and al-
  28 passios; of lumber-producing firms,
                                                 location of capital resources, 255, 281—
  136; and extraction rate, 347—53; and
                                                 83, 303—4; and discovery rate, 277—80,
  financial strength, 352; process of
                                                 285, 365, 397—98; and discovery, 293,
  changing, 353—55; and flexibility, 354;
  and value of resources, 355—56                 326; and income distribution, 297; and
Reserves for amortization: 355—58; as            equity, 298, 299; deferral of, 299; and
  cushions, 356—58
                                                 stability, 309—10; and concentration of
Ricardo, David, 423—46 passirn                   wealth, 310—11; and liquidity problems,
Risk: 15, '6, 243, 257, 264; in shale oil,       323; and externalities, 327, 328. See also
  184—86; and exploration, 241; and price        Capital-gains tax; Depletion allow-
  fluctuations, 242, 243; and leases, 248,       ances; Income tax; Property taxes;
  249; and taxes, 253, 255, 256, 265; and        Royalties; Sales tax; Severance tax;
  extraction rate, 316, 317, 318                 Site-value tax; Value-added tax
Royalties: 237, 238, 239, 249, 25s; and        Tenure: open, 157, 161—62, 164—66, 225,
  shale oil, 188—94 passin; on mines, '99;       383—84, 391—93; international, 158—59;
  reasons for, 200                               and extraction rate, 317. See also Own-
                                                 ership of resources
Sales lax, 254, 255                            Timber. See Lumber industry
  450                                                                         Index

Tobacco industry: and imputation, 19—20      254; neutrality of, 254, 255, 285—87;
TRED, xv                                     shifting of, 254—57 passim, 260—64; and
                                             risk, 255, 256; and allocation of re-
User cost, 34—39 passim, 47                  sources, 255, 263, 264
Utilidad publica, 202—6 passini             Value judgments: 295—314 passim; and
Utilization rate. See Extraction rate        equity, 296—300; and efficiency, 3oo—
                                              o; and growth, 307—9; and stability,
Valuation of natural resources: 326, 329,     309—10; and freedom, io—ii; and se-
 330; and rent, 425, 438—40, 442              curity, 311—12
Value-added tax: 254—56, 265; bases for,    Vertical integration, 360—b!, 394—95
                 Extractive Resources and Taxation
                      edited by Mason Gaffney
               (The University of Wisconsin Press, 1967)


Correction to page 99, second line from bottom of text:
for rameter(s) that optimize the criterion (preference) function. If the
read rameter for a succeeding period) can be determined by analytical




On page xii, the name of Lewis C. Gray should be associated with the
Appendix which follows it, not with the Editor's Conclusion.
