:
ot
H
:
|
|
{
i
|
j
:
‘
H
!
$
i
H

‘

SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT
M. MASON GAFFNEY*

This paper attempts to define land rent net of soil depletion.
The paper is an outgrowth of a larger study’ of the meaning and
function of land rent, and is not represented as more than a subspe-
cialized monograph focused on its fragment of the wider topic.
Some economists will challenge one or more of its implicit postulates,
but it offers only an introductory gesture at their defense, as that
would otherwise constitute a separate subject. The paper does sow,
where germane, some wild oats, hopefully germinable, on issues in
conservation, tax policy, and mineral depletion, but only as obiter
dicta.

In the last few years, economists’ interest in land rent and land

- values has reversed a long downtrend and shown a lusty new vigor.

As recently as 1953 it was possible to write of “The Declining Eco-
nomic Importance of Agricultural Land.”? Since then, the value of
farm real estate in forty-eight states, as estimated by the Eco-
nomic Research Service of the United States Department of Agricul-
ture, has risen from 97 billion dollars to 155 billion dollars, or about
58 per cent, in spite of real estate taxes having risen to some one and
one-half billion dollars yearly, and mortgage rates having risen to
over 6 per cent. The percentage of “real estate” which is “land”——or
at least is not “buildings’’—has risen to 74 per cent. Since 1953, the
mean annual increment to farm real estate values, 5 billion dollars,
has equalled roughly 30-40 per cent of net income of farm operators.
Since then, it has become widely recognized that the vested interest
of farm landholders in values sustained by farm programs is a major
obstacle to rational readjustment of obsolete farm programs. Since
then, the Soil Bank programs have demonstrated that an annual out-
lay of about 700 million dollars, for bare land alone, was enough to
entice only 28 million acres into retirement, or 8 per cent of our
cropland area, suggesting that the imputed rental value of land not
retired may be enough to absorb the lion’s share of net farm income.
Since then it has been rediscovered that high land prices are a prime
barrier to entry of young men into farming.

* Chairman, Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.

1, M. M. Gaffney, Ground Rent and the Allocation of Land among Firms, in Rent
Theory, Problems and Practices (Miller ed., North Central Land Tenure Research
Committee 1962) (Mo. Research Bulletin No. 810).

2. T. Schultz, The Economic Organization of Agriculture, ch. 8 (McGraw-Hill 1953).

ofp sere ie ree

é

538 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL EVob. 4

A shower of scholarly works has accompanied the resurgence of
land rents and prices.*

It is no longer necessary to emphasize, therefore, the importance
of agricultural land. There is no longer any question that there is
such a thing, that it is extremely valuable, takes a large share of farm
income, and plays a vital role in human affairs.

If land and rent are topical, they are also of enduring significance .
to economics. It is net land rent, not contract rent, that determines
the allocation of land at the margins between farms. It is land rent
that helps determine the optimal allocation of land between present
and future uses, and is thus a vital element in determining replace-
ment policy :* replacement of buildings, orchards, machines, terraces,
pastures, livestock, timber and other capital items. It is land rent that
perdures, extending into the indefinite future, and is capitalized into
land values so high that the investor ordinarily can expect to receive
only a return on his investment, not a return of it. It is the enchance-
ment of land rent, and of land values capitalized from it, that pro-
vides a main rationale for outlays on public works projects that im-
prove lands (as what projects do not?), whereby ground rent helps

3. Hawtrey, Production Functions and Land—A New Approach, 70 Economic J. 114
(1960) ; D. R. Denman & V. F. Stewart, Farm Rents (George Allen and Unwin 1959) ;
Bellerby, Gross and Net Farm Rent in the United Kingdom, J. of the Proceedings of the
Agricultural Economics Soc’y 356 (1954); Whetham, Rent and Agricultural Price
Review, 68 Economic J. 605 (1958); Stigler, Ricardo and the 93% Labor Theory of
Value, 48 Am. Econ. Rev. 355 (1958); Samuelson, 4 Modern Treatment of the Ricard-
ian Economy, 73 Q. J. Econ. 217 (1959) ; Johnson, Allocation of Agricultural Income, 30
J. of Farm Economics 724 (1948) ; Ruttan & Stout, Regional Differences in Factor Shares
in American Agriculture, 42 J. of Farm Economics $2 (1960); J. S. Keiper, E. Kurnow,
C. D. Clark & H. H. Segal, Theory and Measurement of Rent (Chilton 1961) ; Mishan,
Rent as a Measure of Welfare Change, 49 Am. Econ. Rev. 386 (1959); W. Vickrey,
General and Specific Financing of Urban Services, in Conference on Public Expenditure
Decisions in the Urban Community (Resources for the Future, Inc. 1962); Aandahl,
Scholter, & Murray, Economic Rating of Soils for Tax Assessment, 36 J. of Farm Eco-
nomics 483 (1954).

4. It is I believe a lapse in several recent works on replacement policy to have over- -
looked this. E.g., Faris, Analytical Techniques used in Determining the Optimum Re-
placement Pattern, 42 J .of Farm Economics 755 (1960). Professor Faris’s difficulties
with his critics, Professors Winder and Trant [Comments on Faris, Determining the
Optimum Replacement Pattern, 43 J. of Farm Economics 939 (1961)] stem from his
overlooking the role of land rent in replacement policy, and their failure, in turn, to
have any impact on Professor Faris’ thinking might well be attributed to the devious
exposition (of their quite correct conclusions) necessitated by their forbearance from
using any term so concrete as “land.” Other recent studies are by F. A. Lutz & D. C.
Hague, The Theory of Capital (MacMillan 196t) ; V. L. Smith, Investment and Produc-
tion (Harvard Univ. Press 1961). For the writer’s position on the question, see M. M.
Gaffney, Concepts of Financial Maturity of ‘Timber and Other Assets (N.C. State Col-
lege Dept. of Agricultural Economics Information Series No. 62, 1957, 1960); M. M.
Gaffney, Land and Rent in Welfare Economics, in Land Economics Research (Acker-
man, Clawson & Harris ed., Resources for the Future, Inc. 1962).

January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 539

guide the allocation of devclopmental resources. It is, finally, land
rent which, if we can cleanly distinguish it from other distributive
shares, constitutes probably an ideal tax base, and certainly a very
practicable one, in a world increasingly in need of ideal and practic-
able tax bases.

A. major barrier to useful applications of the land rent concept,
however, has ever been the problem of imputation, The anti-imputa-
tionists, who are always with us, point out that you cannot unscram-
ble an omelette. One may concede the point, but yet wonder if we
can’t still tell the omelette from the frying pan.

The distinction of urban sites from buildings is fairly clear cut.
Site value is what would remain after a good fire. Farm soils, on the
other hand, provide good sport for the “omelette school,” for here
parts of the frying pan appear to merge with the omelette. Farm
soils are not only amended by and mixed with man-made nutrients,
but some of them, and some parts of all of them, appear to lack
the distinctly longer life-expectancy, and potentiality of salvage
and re-use, that so clearly distinguishes sites from buildings, and
frying pans from omelettes.

The “omelette school” may revel, therefore, in the difficulties fac-
ing economists who seek means to impute returns to specific inputs
used in conjunction with soil, and to soil itself. The difficulties are un-
deniable, affording easy debaters’ points for the captious. The sub-
stantive formidability of the difficulties, however, is largely a function
of the economist's will to overcome them constructively. I suggest
the effort is well warranted.

It is truc of any situation, indeed, that the finer we can break down
its elements, and their individual workings, the more effective control
we can exercise, for private and public ends. Some private ends of
rent imputation are these: Imputation is essential for optimal com-
bination of inputs; for economical allocation of land among farms, or
between one’s farm and the Soil Bank; for optimal timing of replacc-
ment; for rent determination. On the public level, imputation is es-
sential to tax policy, conservation policy, analysis of true net social
capital formation, administration of public lands, and benefit-cost
analysis of public works (where much of the benefit appears as en-
hanced rents). These ends seem adequate to motivate economists to
scour their frying pans,* and, where the omelette defies conventional
detergents, to synthesize more specific ones. That is the object of this

paper.

5. Bracing ourselves for the inevitable wit who will ask if we are not rather falling
out of those frying pans into the fire.

540 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vor 4

I
FOUR ECONOMIC CATEGORIES FOR SOIL ANALYSIS

Land rent is an income, corresponding to a flow of services from a
durable resource. Rent is analogous to the legal concept of usufruct,
the right to the income of an estate without impairment of its sub-
stance. Land rent is net of depletion of virgin fertility, for depletion
constitutes sale of the substance of the resource, and the correspond-
ing payment is not income but a transfer, the liquidation or amortiza-
tion of a fund, comparable to sale of title to part of the land itself.
Of course, rent is also net of depreciation and obsolescence of im-
provements on and in the ground; and among improvements we tnust
include artificial fertility.

Some writers have seemed to fail to deduct depletion when reckon-
ing rent. Thus Bunce writes that, under exploitation, “the net income
accruing to the land will be higher than it would be when fertility has
to be maintained.”’* Again, federal law forbids farmers’ deducting
soil depletion from taxable income. Yet, again, keepers of the na-
tional income accounts deduct nothing for soil depletion. Are they
thus tending to overstate aggregate farm income, and to overstate
net farm capital formation by a yet larger percentage ? It may be that
part of what we call “net capital formation,” and impute to thrift, is
rather the metamorphosis of natural geological fund resources into
man-made capital, through liquidation and reinvestment. Or is the
proper depletion charge too small to warrant the trouble of find-:
ing it?

It is easy to say we should acknowledge soil depletion with some
charge. But the problem of distinguishing income, or rent, from
depletion is not simple. What is the proper depletion allowance when
a farmer liquidates soil fertility? And there is another question: is
the true income, net of depletion, that imputes to exhaustible but un-
exhausted soil fertility, properly rent, or is it classical ‘‘interest”’? Is
is, like rent, an income imputable to natural and social forces—Mar-
shall’s ‘public value” of land—exogenous to the individual atomistic
landholder? Or is it, like interest, the reward of an owner’s past
restraint in sparing the soil, and a socially functional incentive for
him to conserve it in the future? To unravel these knotty topics it is
useful to define at least four separate aspects of virgin soil fertility,
distinguishing the four on the basis of economic concepts and criteria.

6. A. C, Bunce, The Economics of Soil Conservation 45 (Jowa State College Press
1942), We will see that Bunce was not entirely wrong.
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 541

Prevailing soils terminology, like that in so many disciplines, re-
flects a conceptual framework developed by natural scientists for
their purposes, and not oriented toward economic problems and
distinctions. It is therefore legitimate for economists to develop their
own categories where necessary to analyze the economic aspects of
soil.

Lassume my readers are conversant with the fund-flow distinction.
The first soil category I propose is the pure flow resource, that is, the
enduring matrix of the ground, with its location, subsoil and drain-
age, macro-relief, climate, and those nutrients which, like iron, are
present in such abundance, relative to prospective withdrawals, as to
be inexhaustible.” .

The matrix is not changceless, for nature is still dynamic and may
impair or improve it. Even man might conceivably destroy a matrix,
if he deliberately and wantonly sct out to do so. Non-farm earth-
moving like strip mining or road cuts may destroy a matrix. The
matrix is however, “indestructible” in this important sense: it
maintains itself without human aid, and despite human neglect and
abuse incident to farm operations.

The economic value of the matrix is not insusceptible to human
influence. The physical matrix is humanly indestructible in the sense
explained above, but the economic value of a location—part of the
matrix concept—is very much the product of surrounding human
activitics, public and private. But the location value is only negligibly
the product of the activities of the atomistic individual landholder as
such. It is rather the sum of the spillover effects, or external econo-
mies, received from surrounding human activities.

The second category is a degree less permanent. It is the “‘conserv-
able flow” element of soil, that which it is possible, but not economi-
cal, to destroy in production. More positively, the ‘“conservable
flow” element is that which it is economical to take pains to conserve,
because it is expected to yield future incomes whose present value
exceeds the present value of conservation costs.* At the core, this
category is as enduring as the matrix, and its income, net of conserva-
tion costs, is part of ground rent. At the fringes, its income is still rent,
but is subject to change of classification as economic parameters
change, and therefore to some uncertainty at all times, since these
parameters are mostly forecasts of future prices and costs. I would

7. An infinite fund is similar to a perpetual flow.
8. Current liquidation value is included among these costs, because generally that is
nothing more than the obviation of current conservation cost.
542 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL {Vor. 4

dispute, however, anyone alleging the concept therefore to be useless,
for there is hardly to be found an economic concept without compar-
able penumbra problems.

The third category comprises the “revolving fund” of soil nutri-
ents. These leave the soil and the site, embodied in crops and live-
stock, but are economical to replace or renew. This class is best likened
to aninventory. :

The fourth category is the “expendable surplus.” It includes finite
fund resources, which yield a liquidation value but are not economical
to renew or replace. It also includes redundant flow resources that
are not economical to conserve, and which yield a “liquidation value”’
in the sense of obviating conservation costs. For an oversimplified
example, if a uniform topsoil is sixty inches deep, and plant roots
can use only forty inches, then twenty inches is expendable surplus.
The top twenty inches does not increase yields, but has the value of
obviating conservation costs as it is allowed to erode off.

The proportion of soil value in each of the four categories varies
greatly with the individual soil. Alluvial bottom, renewed by periodic
flood and aeolian deposits, is largely permanent and resistant to
abuse. On the other hand, thin erosive steep soils in zones of tor-
rential rains or drought and windstorm have little permanent use
value.

The proportion also changes with price and cost parameters. When
land is cheap, much topsoil seems “expendable” that later becomes
“conservable.” Thus at today’s high land prices (assuming them to
continue), the exploitive practices of 1940 and 1950 are no longer
appropriate: a great deal of “expendable” soil has become ‘‘con-

9. “Conservable,” that is, in the prevailing opinion of the market. ‘he market may
be quite wrong in its outlook. Objectively, however, that judgment can only be passed
ex post. To give the categories objective boundaries, ex ante, we must use the predomi-
nant forecast implicit in the market prices. That docs not prevent individuals from
disagreeing with the market—they can couch their dissent in terms of what physical
soil quantities are conservable and expendable, and whether they choose to buy or sell
at market prices.

The present situation is blurred by the fact that high land prices are in some (un-
known) part the resul? of the growth of the belief that modern developments obviate
many costly conservation practices previously believed necessary for sustained output.
That is, modern thinking (whether or not correct) has enlarged the matrix and reduced
the conseryable, flow, and that has increased land rents and values. ‘Thus, a lesser inter-
est in conservation is contemporaneous with higher land values, but as cause, not effect.

High land values will stimulate conservation effort if (1) they impute to the con-
servable element of the soil; (2) they derive from expectations of the remote as well as
the near future; and (3) they do not trap many farmers in low-equity positions that
force liquidation.
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 543

servable.”® Again, when fertilizer is cheaper, more of the soil be-
comes replaceable, and less soil is expendable; likewise, less soil is
conservable.

The proportions also tend to change over time. There is a tendency
for expendable virgin surpluses to be expended, and the remainder to
approach zere, but the tendency plods far behind changes in demand
and technology. There is always some expendable soil. Around grow-
ing cities, soil destined for urbanization becomes largely expendable.
And whenever falling farm prices are anticipated there is an extra
premium on current over future output that shifts some soil to the
expendable class.

The proportions also depend on location. An erosive soil in a
prime location might be economical to conserve because to expend
it would be to lose the future usé of the valuable site. The same
soil on a remote site might be expendable.

Objective definition and measurement of rent in relation to soil
fertility has been hindered by the penchant of some debaters to throw
all soils into one of our categories. There are the soils fundamen-
talists and Malthusians, to whom most soils are irreplaceable and
who object to regarding much of them as permanent, or replaceable,
or—perish the myopic thought—expendable! Then there is the pri-
vate property fundamentalist who gives nature little credit: all honor
to the sturdy pioneers who created Heaven and earth from primor-
dial chaos, or at the very least wrested earth from the elements, like
Dutch polders from the North Sea. ‘Vo this fundamentalist, soil fer-
tility is largely man-made, hence renewable by man like the revolving
fund of an inventory.

Ricardo is often accused of fundamentalism in describing soil as
“indestructible.” He may be more the victim of a hasty turn of phrase
than a true extremist. Operationally, the most extreme “indestruc-
tible” position is held by those who say the least about it, but by their
silence implicitly assume indestructibility. These are the production
economists who arrive at this or that optimal combination of inputs
without heed to different rates of soil loss associated with different
input combinations. To them we should add ‘The Explaincrs” of
farm tenancy, who tell us how a young farmer can rent more assets
than he can borrow, but are silent about what havoc he may wreak on
those rented soil assets. [t is hardly necessary to add that some farm-
ers have behaved as though all soils are expendable, to be looted and
left languishing as quickly as possible.
544 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vor 4

The four categories of soil suggested here let us acknowledge the
existence of soil elements answering to all the extreme assumptions,
but permit us to balance out the picture and analyze the diversity of
individual soils. Let us then look a little closer at the four categories.

II
THE MATRIX

The matrix is the perdurable base of the soil. We have seen that it
is indestructible by the neglect and abuse incident to farm operations.
What clements does it comprehend? First is the site, or extension
plus location relative to markets and sources of complementary in-
puts. Access to hard-surface roads is a large clement in farm land
values. Access to water is paramount in arid states. Next is the
climate holding sway over that site, important for its own sake and
also as a major soil-building agent. Then is the macro-relief; the un-
derlying rock from which the soil is formed, or the mantle of till or
loess where those are the source of the soil, or the complex of condi-
tions that cause alluvium or loess to be deposited currently.

Another important element of the matrix is the subsoil, especially
as it affects drainage. “Crop production is as dependent on the subsoil
as on the surface layer.” Below that lies the parent material with
its balance of nutrient and perhaps toxic elements. The upper layer
of parent material is usually under attack by soil-forming chemical
and physical processes. Soil formation is a continuous process, with
a moving profile cutting down continually into parent material."

Below the parent material may be aquifers whose capacity to re-
ceive, store, and release water is of great value to farm operations
on the surface, especially in this age of cheap rural power and tur-
bine pumps.

We have mentioned that inexhaustible funds of common mineral
nutrients are in effect perpetual flows, hence part of the perdurable
matrix. The same may be said of layers of topsoil that are clearly
redundant, for example some valley soils that are over thirty feet
deep. In general, topsoil below plant root levels is trapped in un-

10. H. H. Krusekopf, in Missouri 29 (Gist ed., Curators of the Univ. of Missouri
1950).

a: C. Kellogg, The Soils that Support Us 46 (Macmillan 1941). “Moderate geologic
erosion gradually removes the leached surface layers, but it permits the formation of a
deep soil profile whose nutrient supply is constantly replenished from the unleached
‘parent material beneath.” H. Kohnke & A. Bertrand, Soi! Conservation 50 (McGraw-
Hill 1959).
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 545

productive cold storage. The loss of top inches lets roots penetrate
deeper and use the idle lower layers, and so such loss hardly warrants
much of a depletion charge until the roots approach bottom.

Even then the loss is not an unmixed evil, for the deep root penetra-
tion accelerates soil-building processes that convert subsoil to topsoil ;
but by that time soil value would have crossed the threshold beyond
which it pays us to take some heed of soil loss, even if we still counten-
ance it, and redundant topsoil would properly be classed as expend-
able surplus, and some depletion charged as it leaves us. The “thresh-
old” is reconsidered below under the treatment of expendable surplus.

The several elements of the matrix determine not only much of a
soil’s productivity and versatility, but also its responsiveness to man-
agement and the duration of its response to soil amendments and
other improvements. ‘Chere is a tendency in some quarters to credit
management with the entire net increase of output from this or that
worthy improvement, but management only exploits potentialities
latent in the land. The same ainendment to a poorer matrix might
last only half the time and give only one-third the increase, so the
better matrix must receive due credit for its contribution to the
joint product.

The matrix is probably more important than the other three soil
categories. Were that not so we would find little use for soil maps,
or Soil Conservation Service land-use capability tables, nor would
we find a corn, wheat, or cotton belt. Soils are the product of mas-
sive, prolonged, and transcendent natural forces not lightly over-
borne, for better or worse, by man’s efforts. ‘Soils then do not
wear out,’ wrote Charles Kellogg, “in the sense that an automobile
wears out. They may become poorer . . . as a result of improper
management. . . . But usually they can be brought back to a good
state whenever men know what to do and want to do it.” ” Through-
out history until recent times the major restorative treatment given
to tired land has been simply to let it rest, fallow, so its natural
regenerative powers might catch up with man’s withdrawals. On
the other hand, Kellogg advises us that our “‘wornout” Eastern soils
never were of much value, and that those built up by men easily
decline, when neglected, to their original state."

Next let us examine those elements of soil which it is possible, if

12. Kellogg, op. cit. supra note 11, at 271. cf.Q. Lindsey, 4 Procedure for the Equitable
Assessment of Nebraska Farm Land, Nebraska Agricultural Experiment Sta. Bull. 410
(1950).

13. Kellogg, of. cit. supra, note 11, at 263.
546 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vor 4

not always economical, to destroy by neglect and abuse incident to
farm operations. We have three categories of these: the “conserv-
able how” element, which is destructible, but whose emplaced value
exceeds its liquidation value; the “revolving fund” clement which it ts
economical to deplete and then replace or rencw; and the “expend-
able surplus” which it pays to liquidate, but not to renew.

IU
‘THE CONSERVABLE FLOW

The “‘conservable flow” element of virgin soil fertility is that
which it takes some pains to keep in its original state, but is worth
those pains because they are less than the cost of replacement and
Jess than the present value of future income from the clement. An
example of conservable flow would be a rather thin surface layer of
superior exogenous soil—loess, or glacial till—underlain by an in-
ferior country rock. In all soils, a good share of virgin soil texture—
the friability, and capacity to receive, store, and release moisture and
nutrients—would also ordinarily be a conservable flow element, for
texture may be maintained at some cost in the form of outlay or
foregone gain, or both, but will deteriorate without such sacrifices.
Virgin humus, a component of soil texture, may be a conservable flow
element—its distinction from the revolving fund elements is dis-
cussed later.

The concept of ‘‘conservable flow” affords an important by-prod-
uct, which is a distinctive and objective meaning for the chameleon-
word “conservation.” “Conservation” is effort effectively devoted
to reduce the loss of virgin flow resources that may be, but need not
be, deteriorated by use. The definition may be given normative con-
tent, without loss of objectivity, by limiting it to virgin flow-resource
endowments whose emplaced value exceeds their liquidation value,
and which are therefore worth conserving. Liquidation of such con-
servable flows is properly described as “irreversible” loss, not be-
cause the soil cannot be rebuilt, but because it can never be rebuilt so
cheaply as the cost of conserving the virgin soil.’

Some readers will doubtless wonder if ‘conservation,’ so defined,
differs significantly from the “maintenance” of old buildings and
other man-made products, In the short run there is clearly a parallel,

14. The definition might also be broadened to include retarding the depletion of
geological funds, and made normative by defining optimal rates of depletion. In either
case, “conservation” is given a unique application to virgin endowments, not to man-
made resources.
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT ‘ 547

just as there is a short-run analogy between land rent and quasi-rent
attaching to buildings. In the long run, however, I belicve the differ-
ences are profound.

The differences rest on the natural origin of virgin soil in contrast
to the human origin of buildings. The word “conserve” is peculiarly
fitted to natural gifts whose supply is.fixed beyond human control,
which man can husband and develop, but not reproduce." The word
is also peculiarly fitted to resources that can be kept indefinitely. Be-
ing a natural product, soil is intrinsically able to sustain itself in per-
petuity without human agency—that is how nature came to leave it to
us in the first place. Conservation measures consist in merely forbear-
ing from interfering with that natural perpetuity, or in compen-
sating for man’s threats to it.

Building maintenance, on the other hand, is ineluctably only a
delaying action. All structures, all human products, are something
of an affront to the elements, which gnaw at them continually so that
they ultimately decompose.

Something there is that doesn’t love a wall,

That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it,

And spills the upper boulders in the sun;

The gaps I mean,

No one has seen them made or heard them made,

But at spring mending-time we find them there. [Frost, “Mending Wall.” ]

Virgin soil, in contrast, is already the product of long decomposi-
tion. It has long since reached the angle of repose, and a chemistry
of stability to match. ‘True, parts of the soil itself are in a process
of slow decomposition, but it is a selective sort of decomposition,
the most refractory and terminal stages of decomposition which
have resisted the buffeting of nature so successfully as usually to
have reached a natural equilibrium with increments of fresh un-
decomposed material from the matrix and atmosphere and vegeta-
tion.

Thus structures deteriorate with time, which nature uses to under-
mine the work of man; soils deteriorate with use, whereby man un-
dermines the work of nature. Maintenance is man’s struggle against
time and nature; conservation is his struggle against use, and himself.
Maintenance is also sometimes a struggle against man, for structures
may deteriorate with usc, or abuse, as well as time. But conservation

‘15. He may contrive partial substitutes for superior resource A; but he does so by
developing other natural resources, B,C, D . . . ete.
548 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vor 4

is not a struggle against time. On the,contrary, time works toward
conservation, since time lets Nature work to restore the status quo
ante hominem, a status of no structures but of virgin soils.

Probably a primary reason why many economists have been
tempted to blur any distinctions between natural funds [like erosive
soil] and artifacts [like buildings] is that our inherited intellectual
equipment, the traditional fund-flow dichotomy, is too limited.
Specifically, it is ambiguous in its classification of assets that de-
preciate with time rather than use. Are buildings flow resources or
fund resources? Like funds, they are finite in time; but like flows,
they yield services as a function of time. If we have only two classes,
fund and flow, we lump buildings and exhaustible nutrients together
because of their similarities, ignoring their differences. The solu-
tion is a third class, for assets that undergo time-depreciation. Let
us call them “flowing funds,” (or ‘finite flows’).

Land does not as a rule undergo time-depreciation, and does
not fall in the class of ‘flowing funds.” The permanent elements are
flow resources; the expendable elements are fund resources. The
only element of land valuc that may be regarded as subject to time-
depreciation in any widespread way is the value attributable to
spillover benefits from nearby artifacts; but this depreciation is
derived from that of artifacts and is not inherent in the physical
properties of land. In most arcas it is offset by maintenance and
replacement of the artifacts.

The difference between conservation and maintenance may be ex-
emplified by an example from among conservation practices. Con-
sider a terrace designed and built to conserve soil. The terrace
structure may last twenty years with maintenance, before deprecia-
tion, otters, and obsolescence prescribe a new one. But the soil that
the terrace has conserved is still in place, still usable, still conservable
by a new terrace. Maintenance of structures merely postpones their
inevitable depreciation; conservation of soil can stop depletion al-
together, or at least reduce it to the rate of natural replacement.

One practical consequence is immediately evident: conservation
investments look much further into the future than do ordinary main-
tenance investments. A higher outlay is warranted to conserve a
given future income stream in perpetuity than mercly to maintain it
for a few years.

Some other distinctions are worth noting. Virgin soil being a
natural resource, human contributions are generally sharply set apart
from it. Structures being man-made, maintenance is a continuation of
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 549

the original building process, often indistinguishable from it. Only
parts of an old structure are literally maintained; many are replaced
outright and the building rebuilt piece by piece, like the storied in-
destructible axe that had lasted for fifty years with only six new heads
and twenty handles. A building that is “conserved” for generations
is more accurately described as a slowly revolving fund, and more
truly likened to the revolving fund element of soil fertility, than it is
likened to virgin soil conserved by man.

Other parts of an old structure, that do endure, are often but-
tressed, shored up, covered over, and so on, so they are replaced
functionally if not physically. Materials fatigue and warp, rot and
molder, crack and scttle, corrode and burn, fade and peel, so main-
tenance grows ever costlier as time exacts its inexorable toll. Soil
conservation, in contrast, is much the same task today that it was
3000 years ago, or whenever man first drove his herds to graze on
the land, and has no prospect of being terminated by demolition for
renewal.

Time also imposes obsolescence on structures, for artifacts are in
competition with an endless outpouring of more modern ones on
other sites, and challengers for their own sites to which they gen-
erally become less and less appropriate as a dynamic society evolves.
Soils, by contrast, are not generally subject to Schumpeter’s “gale
of creative destruction” from new products. Perhaps they might be
so subject had nature been stingier, so that man was continually
employed in pulverizing rock with guano and raking it out on alkali
flats to create most of his soil supplies; and insofar as soils are artifi-
cial they do resemble other artifacts, and obsolesce, as well as depre-
ciate, like them. But nature has supplied us with such an abundance
of virgin soi], of such stable and conservable qualities, that for the
most part it is more economical to conserve the old than create new,
and obsolescence is generally a negligible factor. As to “demolition”
of obsolete soils, it is practically unheard of. If an old soil is to be re-
placed by new, it is almost always done by amending the old, not
scraping it off and beginning fresh. Obsolete structures, on the other
hand, can rarely be mingled with new ones. They are torn down and
the ground cleared for a new start.

There are man-made soils, of course, and most soils contain some
“revolving fund” elements supplied by man. But such artificial soils
and soil elements are generally out of balance with their natural en-
vironment and therefore unstable. Virgin soil is largely the product
of the local matrix and climate; these are basic determinants which
550 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vou 4

work ceaselessly to reduce all interloping alien elements to the like-
ness of the virgin soil. Artificial soils, and amendments in soils, are
therefore depreciable, like structures, with time, and of course they
also are vulnerable to obsolescence.

Virgin soil, then, is genuinely a unique resource, differing signifi-
cantly from artifacts, even its closest substitutes. And conservation
of virgin soils differs significantly from maintenance of artifacts,
cnough so, surely, to warrant a separate entry in the dictionary of
economics.

Returning, now, to the meaning of “rent,” all the above bears on
the question. The net income imputable to conservable flow elements
of the soil, above conservation costs, is part of ground rent. Looking
to the past, virgin soil is by origin a natural endowment, like the
matrix. Looking to the future, the conservable flow element of virgin
soil, while destructible, is not economical to destroy. It does have a
liquidation value, unlike the matrix, but the liquidation value is by
definition always less then the emplaced value. And so the consery-
able flow has the same long life expectancy as the matrix, assuming
an institutional environment which imposes or permits of economic
decisions. The net rent of the conservable flow element of virgin soil
is reduced by conservation costs; but there remains, except in mar-
ginal cases, a surplus over conservation cost, which surplus is part of
rent. As such it is a gift of nature, subject to all the generalizations
economists make about rent, including its peculiar suitability for
taxation.

Some readers may object to that line of reasoning, saying that the
conservable flow clements of soil are really human contributions:
man has abstained from liquidating them in the past, and requires
incentives to ensure future forbearance.

That objection must fall, however, because the liquidation value
the landholder denies himself never exceeds the emplaced value he
chooses instead. His contribution is simply to allocate the soil to its
most lucrative use over time. He abstains only from shedding his
own blood.

The point is quite clear when the landholder’s choice is between
alternatives at the same point of time, or over the same period. An
urban landholder, for example, who devotes a site to the highest
commercial use thereby sacrifices many less remunerative alternative
uses, but the maximurn commercial rent, al! of it, is no less the ground
rent. For the essence of ground rent is not the excess over some
alternative use, or opportunity cost—that is a different and, I be-
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 551

lieve, undefinable’* usage of the word ‘‘rent,” which we will hence-
forth differentiate with the name “‘transfer-rent.” he essence of
ground rent is the excess of gross yield over the human contribution,
that is, the non-land inputs.

The conserving Jandholder’s sacrifice of quick liquidation values
from virgin soil is the sacrifice of an uneconomical time-distribution
of future revenues. The optimal time-distribution of future net
revenues from the land yields a rent which is no less completely
ground rent on account of the possibility of choosing less-than-op-
timal time-distributions.

An operational test of whether a payment for the use of matrix
and soil is properly “rent” is whether the landholder would, in the
long run, fail to supply the resource, or would withdraw it once sup-
plied, if the full latent rent were charged to him as a periodic lump
sum, a function of time uncontingent on his allocative decisions.
Natural origin is of the essence here: the prospect of such a tax or
charge would deter anyone from creating the tax base initially, but
nature has already created virgin soil. Conservability is also of the
essence: a landholder faced with the prospect of uncontingent rent
charges would not be moved to liquidate conservable flow clements of
the soil, since he would thereby simply lower his income, the tax be-
ing uncontingent on conservation and therefore not declining in
result of depletion.

Such a tax would, if anything, sharpen his incentives to adopt
optimal conservation practices. For the tax puts him in a high-lever-
age position, analogous to that of a stockholder in a heavily bonded
corporation. The percentage rise in his net income from making right
decisions is much higher than when he has no fixed charges to mect.

That conclusion presumes that abandonment is not a possibility.
In practice that means that the landholder has some appreciable
equity in the total bundle of real estate. Tenure institutions, and/or
cyclical situations, that permit men to hold tenure with little equity,
in soils with a high proportion of conservable flow elements, pose the
danger of liquidation followed by abandonment to creditors, land-
lords, or taxing agencies—let us borrow a term from the Jaw of entail
and lump the last group as “remaindermen.” In such situations, it
behooves the private or public remainderman to recognize that con-
servable flow elements are destructible, and their income, for the
duration of the situation, should not be treated like the ground rent

16. Indeed, such a usage would lead to a negative rent whenever land is misallocated,
which is often.
$52 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [VoL. 4

of the truly indestructible matrix. But it also behooves social philoso-
phers to recognize the abnormal crisis aspect of such pathological
situations, and not treat them as the standard norm.

Abandonment situations can be minimized by intelligent social
policy. They have ariscn historically largely in the backwash of some
of our more extreme land booms, when over-extended debtors were
left without equity; on lands which had been farmed exploitively and
not much improved ; where improvements were subject to heavy taxes,
along with the land; and in jurisdictions which winked at prolonged
tax delinquencies and endless legal delays in foreclosure proceedings.
This is not the place to go into public policies, other than to assert
that effective policies are feasible to preclude anyone from reaping
the benefits of soil liquidation without bearing the costs—the absence
of such policies is indeed virtually the absence of law and order, As-
suming such policies to be in effect, the income of conservable flow
elements of virgin soil is part of ground rent. .

Some readers will still object to regarding incomes from conserv-
able flow elements as rent, on the grounds that they are rather fruits
of the landlord’s good judgment. If the landholder gets no credit
for forbearance, perhaps he should get credit for decision-making.

Where the disclosure of outcomes is immediate, it is hard to allow
much to a landholder for allocating land to its best use, which-re-
quires only that he distinquish higher from lower numbers of dollars.
But where disclosure of outcomes is deferred, as with conservation
decisions which involve time-distribution of future costs and revenues,
allocation involves judgment, forecasting, risk-bearing, and there-
fore a higher input of management.

Those inputs are sometimes identified as the source of rent, on
the grounds that the land alone could yield nothing. That, however,
is rather a primitive fallacy of the ‘omelette school.’ Rent is never a
value that the land yields without human help, but is rather the yield
in excess of the human input. The valuation of managerial inputs in-
volving judgment is trickier than pricing elementary labor inputs, but
that such imputation occurs is manifest in the salaries of hired man-
agers; that it leaves the total product unexhausted is manifest in the
prices paid for raw land.

As to productive risk-taking, I would suggest that that is not a
function of the landholder as such, but of the investor as such, mean-
ing by “investor” the one who carries the financing of current output.
He may or may not be the same individual who carries the land title,
because deferment of liquidation is the special province and function
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT $53

of capital, not land. Risk-taking is economic shock-absorption. Only
funds can absorb economic shocks. Land is largely a flow resource,
and land as such is hired from day to day and paid a steady periodic
hire by the risk-taker as such.

IV
THE REVOLVING FUND

Now let us turn to the third element of virgin soil fertility, the
“revolving fund.” It is that element which is not economical to con-
serve, but is economical to replace or renew with matcrials imported
from offsite. It is like an inventory. Examples of revolving funds are
the scarce nutrients nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, and calcium,
which are removed from the site, embodied in crops and livestock,
or leached off in the productive process, then replaced commercially.
Another revolving fund is ground water in areas like the San Joaquin
Valley in California, where water is pumped down, but is also re-
chargeable by human hand. Ground water in the high plains of west
Texas, on the other hand, is not a revolving fund resource but an
expendable surplus, because there is no economical source of recharge.

Revolving funds are largely a feature of commercial agriculture,
in which crops are exported from their sites so that nutrients are not
entirely replaced by the closed cycles of natural conditions, and so
must be imported. Closed natural cycles are not “‘revolving”’ of funds,
as the phrase is used here. Some readers might wonder if there is any
meaningful distinction between these closed natural cycles and the
revolving fund process. I believe there is, and it is important for the
definition of rent because (a) the income imputable to revolving funds
is not part of rent, and (b) the important soil element humus moves
in a natural cycle but is largely a conservable flow resource. Let us
elaborate.

Humus is derived from surface organic matter. Minerals circulate
from humus to crops to humus. But the circulation is vertical, that is
on-site, as opposed to the horizontal or offsite circulation of revolv-
ing funds.

Why is that distinction important? Because the humus circulation
is self-sustaining, like other conservable flow elements without human
interposition, Humus differs from them in being a living process as
much as a static structure, but it is a permanent and stable process, a
sort of perpetual motion machine bequeathed by nature, which man
can control, and in which man can participate without destroying.
554 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vo 4

It might be thought that when man intercedes in the natural cycle,
by controlling surface culture, humus would become a revolving fund,
as the term is used here. But it retains more of the attributes of a con-
servable flow. The humus still feeds the crops, which are controlled
but not nourished by man. The humus is not withdrawn and then
replaced exogenously. It fecds the crops that then renew it, in a
continuous integral process. Humus cannot usually be withdrawn and
then replaced, economically: without humus, poor crops; with poor
crops, little humus-increment. To a degree, humus reserves can be
drawn down for later recharge. But-on the whole, the mechanism
must be kept in continuous operation, for liquidation is not reversible
except at a much advanced cost. Those are traits of what we have
called the conservable flow clements of virgin soil, not the revolving
fund.

Hummus can of course be liquidated without replacement, which
puts some of it in the “expendable surplus” category.

The income imputable to revolving funds in the soil is not part of
ground rent, but the return to an improvement to the site, quite
analogous to a return on the capital tied up in stores of silage.
After the initial depletion, each decision to reinvest is an indepen-
dent one which requires its incentive and represents a sacrifice of
human alternatives.

There is an interesting point of similarity between revolving funds
and the matrix, in respect to interest rates and tax rates. Because of
their high time-rate of turnover, the gross return from revolving
funds is largely amortization, net income being a small part only.
As with all funds that turn over quickly, the supply is not very
clastic either to interest rates, or to ad valorem general property tax
rates, these burdens being low relative to the total amortization
value. If, therefore, ad valorem tax assessments should be raised in
result of soil amendments, it would be much less discouraging than
is the ad valorem tax on structures, or timber, which pay the tax many
times before they are amortized. In respect to property-tax-clasticity
of supply, revolving funds arc a little like the completely inclastic
matrix and conservable flow clements. In respect to a turnover or
sales tax, on the other hand, they are quite elastic because of the
frequency with which they pass through the market place. So while
one might argue that the return to revolving funds somewhat resem-
bles true rent in one instance, it is far removed in the second, and in
general cannot be treated as rent.

January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 555

As to the liquidation of the initial endowment, that is of course
amortization, not income. There ts a further value to consider, the
appreciation of the virgin fund before liquidation, which is income
and a form of rent. That question, however, we defer to the discus-
sion of expendable surpluses, which we now take up.

v
THE EXPENDABLE. SURPLUS

Expendable surplus elements are those whose liquidation value ex-
ceeds their emplaced valuc, or is expected to in the foresceable fu-
ture ;!? and which are not economical to replace when expended.

Expendable surplus might seem at the farthest remove from the
perdurable matrix. And at the core, the two concepts are indeed

‘sharply different. But the line between them is not casy to draw. We

have noted that some soil elements, like iron, are so abundant and
inexhaustible as to constitute part of the permanent matrix, an in-
finite fund being tantamount to a perpetual flow. Expendable sur-
pluses are not infinite funds, but they are often very large ones, whose
emplaced value is very low, per unit, and hardly perceptible.

An expendable surplus is a finite fund which grows small enough,
relative to demand, so that the emplaced value of a year’s with-
drawals enters over the threshold of our perception. That threshold
is inevitably an arbitrary Jine—Ict us suggest the line where emplaced
value surpasses 3% of liquidation value. More generally, it would
be that emplaced value which was great enough to warrant a man-
ager’s beginning to bestir himself, or make some cultural adapta-
tions, to decelerate the losses.

Fortunately for the definition of rent, the element of arbitrariness
in defining the threshold line has no large effect on what is rent and
what is not. When the fund is “infinite,” the imputed return is all
income, all rent. When the fund becomes finite, a depletion charge is
in order, but at first that charge is very small, and the excess of
imputed yield over depletion allowance is still rent.

Some readers might object to that analysis on the grounds that the
depletion allowance should be equal to the liquidation value, or at
least next year’s liquidation value discounted back over just one year.

17. There is an optimal rate at which to deplete, so a surplus is expended over a
long period. Just how much will ultimately be expended is uncertain today. Fortunately,
this element of fuzziness docs not significantly affect the division of receipts between in-
come and depletion, as we will see.
556 NATURAL RESOURCES JOURNAL [Vou. 4

But that procedure strikes this writer as being seriously in error. For
next year’s liquidation is not sacrificed by this year’s withdrawal from
the finite fund; only the terminal liquidation is sacrificed, far in the
future. If, for example, a soil has a fifty-year fund of calcium, the
withdrawal of year onc does not sacrifice the withdrawal of year two,
but of year fifty. The emplaced value, which equals the depletion
charge, is the liquidation value expected in year fifty discounted back
over fifty years to the present. That is all one can net off as depletion
allowance. The rest is income: land-rent.

If I may offer a homely analogy, the toothpaste one squeezes from
the tube tonight docs not constitute a sacrifice of tomorrow night’s
supply. One rather rolls up the end of the tube, which may be likened
to the exhaustion date of the fund resource, and brings it nearer to
the orifice, which represents the present. It is next month’s supply
which is sacrificed, and if toothpaste tubes lasted long enough for
compound interest to be perceptible, the depletion value would fall
below the liquidation value.

If one objected that the sum of all depletion allowances would
then fail to exhaust the initial cost, the answer would be No, it is
rather that the sum of liquidation values would exceed the inittal cost,

’ the excess being an income, the return on the investment carried over
time. So with geological funds: their present values fall well below
the sum of their future liquidation values, the difference being com-
pound interest on the present values of the quantities destined for
withdrawal in each future year, That excess is a species of income
that the unexhausted fund earns over time, and I believe we state it
correctly by using a depletion allowance equal to the discounted value
of the most remote future liquidation receipt. I also believe we are
generally correct to identify that excess as part of land rent.”

The extended implications of that simple conclusion in relation to
mines and oil reserves should be exciting. If the conclusion is valid, oil
depletion allowances as presently reckoned are even more of an out-
rage than we already know them to be for other reasons, and should
approach liquidation values only when oil reserves approach exhaus-
tion, Oil and mines are able to bear much higher taxes, both income
and ad valorem, than is currently believed. But we are overstepping
the bounds of this brief paper, and will close that toothpaste tube
until a sequel.

18. Cf. E. Bohm-Bawerk, Positive ‘Vheory of Capital 335 (Libertarian Press 1959).
January, 1965] SOIL DEPLETION AND LAND RENT 557

CONCLUSION

The upshot is that depletion of virgin fertility, or the possibility
of it, does not ordinarily detract much from ground rent. Matrix
income is all rent. So is conservable flow income, only net of conser-
vation costs. Revolving funds supplied by man yield gross incomes
that are not rent, but largely amortization, with a small net income
that is not rent either, but the yield on an investment of man-made
capital. Expendable surpluses yield liquidation values from which
only a small depletion charge, based on remote future liquidation, is
properly deductable, so that their liquidation yields are largely a
species of rent income.

Only when the economic exhaustion of a geologic fund is imminent
does the depletion element loom larger than the income element. In
this case, modifications of private and public policies that acknowl-
edge the replacement of income by depletion are appropriate. For
example, the gradual or partial replacement of ad valorem by sever-
ance taxes would make sense as exhaustion approaches. But the need
for such policies in some times and places should not blind us to the
general prevalence of conditions where exhaustion is not imminent,
and the returns to landholders are true rent, a form of net income.2®

19. Cf. J. R. Commons, A Progressive Tax on Bare Land Value, 37 Pol. Sci. Q. 41
(1922) ; L. C. Gray, Rent under the Assumption of Exhaustibility, 28 Q. J. Econ. 466
(1914).
