8




Land and Rent in Welfare Economics


                                                     by M. Mason GatFney*




     In the classical synthesis, human welfare and land rent were two
parts of an integrated philosophy. As Smith, Mill, Marshall, and
especially Ricardo scan us from their present eyries they must note with
 shock two virtually separate disciplines tagged "land economics" and
"welfare economics." The first has come to connote Wisconsin Institu-
tionalism with its skepticism of marginal analysis, its emphasis on
evolution, its earthy pragmatism and inductive reasoning. The second
designates a rarefied a priori Scholasticism that proceeds from sanitary
postulates through tangencies and equations to anything from sweeping
reforms to nagging doubts about the value of any economics. The division
of the two constitutes an indefensible compartmentalization of thought, and
the writer does not favor either over the other. Rather he suggests some
paths toward reintegration.
     The two subdisciplines contrast in a number of ways. Welfare
economics tends to emphasize static optimality, with only perfunctory
obeisance to the passage of time; land economics deals with long-run
intertemporal changes. Welfare economics is generally spaceless, also,
while space is the essence of land economics. Land economists have been
impatient of theory to the verge of anti-intellectualism, while welfare
economists exhibit more patience than most of their readers in spinning
subtleties which, instead of being means to human welfare, sometimes

    *M. MASON GAFFNEY has been associate professor and professor of agricultural
economics at the University of Missouri since 1958. Born in New York in 19Z3. he did
his undergraduate work at Reed College, and obtained his Ph.D. from the University
of California. He has been an instructor at the University of Oregon, an assistant
professor at North Carolina State College, and a Ford Foundation fellow. One of his
interests is Land rent, a aatter which he treats in this chapter.
Author's Note: To Thomas Crocker, Research Assistant sans pareil, my thanks for many valuable
contributions; to Dean Elmer Kiehi, my thanks for fostering an environment favorable to basic
research; to Marion Clawson, my thanks for gently prodding me into finishing this chapter; to all
three, my thanks for tolerance of roy heterodoxy, and absolution from responsibility for it.

                                              141
142

seem to become the ends of their lucubrations. As to policy, land
economists are probably too easily pleased, asking only to see movement
in economical directions; welfare economists are often implacable,
spurning mere "piecemeal" optimizing, pointing ever upwards and out-
wards to ideal and universal Platonic prototypes. Land economists are
the more eclectic for they do read the welfare literature, which in its
turn, however, yields no evidence that any pure welfare theorist since
Pigou knew a shred of land economics.
     As an earthbound land economist levitates through the pure welfare
literature he sees much to admire: lhe rigor; the elegant marginalism;
the normative pursuit of the general welfare; the suppression of sub-
jective bias; the boldness with policy. He wishes he saw more of those in
his own subdiscipline. But he also finds it a long way between drinks, and
he wonders what earthlings can survive in these arid and vertiginous
altitudes. He does not insist that all economists have met payrolls, but
those who declaim on so humanistic a subject as welfare should exhibit
some sign that they bleed when cut and weep when wounded. Between the
Platonic peaks and the deeps of life and sin there must lie a temperate
zone where the universals of theory come to bear on more humid human
problems. Probably the greatest reciprocal contribution of land and
welfare economics is to balance one another and keep within that temperate
zone, where indeed we already see the tracks of Regan, Chryst, Margolis,
 Tolley, Clawson, Krutilla, Eckstein, Renshaw, Hirshleifer, Milliman, and
others, who commendably defy subclassification: they are economists.
      Welfare economics has a signal contribution for land economics in
its normative outlook. Land economists are prone to accept the institu-
tions they emphasize as ultimate constraints, fixed with the stars in their
courses. They cast themselves, with notable exceptions, in the subsidiary
role of commentators scribbling in the margins of history, annotating the
ineluctable. Dulled by the gross wastes their profession keeps disclosing
they grow uncritical.
      Welfare economists are more delicately attuned, more imperious,
and in an important sense more realistic. They look through and beyond
institutional constraints to the ultimate goals of human organization.
 They assert the status of those ultimates over mere institutions, evaluate
institutions accordingly, consign to perdition those found wanting, and
rise on their hind legs with bold new gadgets such as social dividends,
lump-sum capacity taxes, or open-ended stock issues to enhance the
general welfare.
      To accompany this attitude they supply an analytical apparatus on
which land economists often rely who do render normative judgments.
The apparatus may grow unwieldy with all the armor it has clad to fend
off cynics and spoilers, but deep inside we still find a simple working
rule, The Rule, the equimarginal principle, and many qualifications to
temper it.
      The obvious contribution of land economics to welfare economics is
an element of reality, a wealth of experience, a feel for human possibili-
ties. Welfare economics has a surplus of empty boxes, which land
economics is peculiarly competent to fill.
     But ironically the prime contribution of land to welfare economics is
a higher degree of generality. For all its ecumenical purport, most of
the "pure" welfare economics is both spaceless and timeless. It is all
very well to abstract from localisms, but space and time are absolute
                                                                                              143
universals. It is welfare economics that preaches against "piecemeal"
optimizing. Economizing at dimensionless points in space and time is
piecemealism beyond sufferance. Space and time are the very stuff of
land economics, and if it contributed nothing else to welfare economics
that would be enough to fill several of those empty boxes.
     Consider consumer surplus. In land economics that attaches not to
free-floating individuals, but specific lands. If Connecticut commuters,
for example, put more aggregate value on the New Haven Railroad than
that unhappy bankrupt can collect at the ticket window, the surplus finds
its way into Connecticut land prices. if California irrigators derive from
water supramarginal benefits above the price, that surplus imputes to
lands under the ditch.
     Consider external economics. Their most general cause is spatial
proximity, and land economics copes with them, both technological and
pecuniary, constantly. Every irrigation development affects ground
water levels and local trade. Urban buildings affect their neighbors'
views, share their transport-utility lines and taxes, and pull customers
to or away from them. A basic way to render external economies internal
is to acquire more land, whereby one evolves from an atomistic parcel-
holder to a competitor of the local government and democracy, which in
tim maintains itself and the viability of atomistic landholdings, by
judicious manipulation of external economies related to land.
     Consider the welfare economist's problem of interdependencies.
Again, these most often entail spatial proximity. Land economists have
grappled for decades with problems of co-ordinating and synchronizing
complementary public and private contributions to the interdependent land
settlement process, both urban and rural.
     Consider the welfare economist's specifications for an ideal tax, a
lump-sum "capacity-tax" based on latent potentialities, uncontingent on
actual economic behavior, without distortion or excess burden. Having
given the specifications, welfare economists are at a curious loss to
identify a suitable base, yet land not only affords a theoretical base of
the requisite properties, but is so taxed and has been for centuries where-
ever assessments are based, as the law now directs in most American
jurisdictions, on site potentialities regardless of current use.
     Last, consider the welfare economist's problem of identifying de-
creasing cost operations, determining marginal costs, and meeting the
deficits implicit in marginal cost pricing. The prototype of decreasing
cost operations is the transport of utility service over a network within a
fixed perimeter. Hotelling, recall, was discussing the general welfare in
relation to problems of taxation and of railway and public utility rates.
Dupuit was concerned with Ponts et Chausses. The consumer surplus
generated was clearly imputed to the rental value of lands served, where
it could be measured and whence recaptured by lump-sum land-capacity
taxes to meet the deficits of marginal cost pricing. 1
     Since Hotelling, welfare economists, in their praiseworthy pursuit
of generality, have abstracted his principle from its earthy genesis until
the material referents are lost and the box emptied. But returned from
the abstrusities of Laputa to the terra firma of Swift's admirable
Houyhnh.nms, the box is full of relevant experience with municipal transit,
   'Harold Hotelling, "The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation and of Railway and
Utility Rates,' Econometrica, July 1938, pp. 242-69, p. 256, and 'The Relation of Prices to
Marginal Costs in an Optimum System," Econometrica, April 1939, pp. 151 -55.
 144

 irrigation districts, cheap power, et hoc genus omne. The "subsidy"
 which offends many conservative econornistsZ is seen to be not properly
 a subsidy at all, not a redistribution from "other industries" or regions,
 but a means of extracting supramarginal surplus windfalls from specific
 beneficiaries by the approved capacity-tax method. Distributionally, it
 bears the earmarks of a charge on gainers usable to compensate losers ---
 again an ideal of welfare economics.
      Those, then, are some reciprocal potential contributions of land and
 welfare economics which we now proceed to develop. First we define
 ground rent and differentiate it from other distributive shares. Second,
 we treat the role of ground rent as an economic constraint on the posses-
 sion of land, both in space and time, by atomistic individual landholders.
 Last, we treat the role of ground rent as a guide to land development by
 transport-utility networks.

     GROUND RENT AND OTHER DISTRIBUTIVE SHARES: SIMILARITIES
                       AND DIFFERENCES

      The concepts of land and ground rent have suffered a terrible mauling
 in recent decades. The new conventional wisdom has it that ground rent
 is only one of many rents, and land is scarcely worth distinguishing from
 other resources, if indeed it can be.
      This is not the place for technical analysis of the imputation of ground
 rent. I have tried elsewhere to show how ground rent may be segregated
 from depletion and depreciation charges and from income of depletable
 virgin fertility and old improvements. 3 In general it is my position that
 the ground4 has salvage value and a future opportunity cost where old im-
 provements do not, so land is valued from the future and old improvements
 residually. In the same work I treat the traditional quibbles about "made"
 land, underground improvements, soil exhaustion, substitutability by
 capital, and Venus de Milo, none of which need detain us here.
      This is the place to point up the importance for welfare economics of
 land's unique qualities: natural origin; fixed location; extension; perma-
 nence;5 fixed aggregate supply.
      Fixed location is the quality that lets land serve as the measure and
 trap for localized consumer surpluses and external economies. Labor and
 capital immigrate to share local windfalls to their kind, and in due time
 compete them away entirely. Benefits to local land are rather imputed
 away in higher rents. Institutional barriers may preserve local benefits
 to local monopolies of labor or capital, but then the windfall imputes to the
 monopoly, not to labor and capital as such. The obstacle to land immigra-
 tion is physical, inherent in the resource itself, and the windfall imputes
 to land as such, whose local monopoly is granted by Nature.
   2For example, Howard S. Ellis and William Fellner, 'External Economies and Diseconomies,
The American Economic Review, September 1943. pp. 493-511.
   3Mason Galfney. "Ground Rent and the Allocation of Land among Firms," Proceedings, 1961
Land Economics Seminar, North Central Land Tenure Research Committee, to be published 1962.
   4By 'ground" I purport something more than "site" but less than "land" as the term is usually
used. Ground is site plus permanent geological matrix, but excluding that much of virgin fertility
which it is economical to deplete. In general the difference is small relative to other economic
magnitudes. and in the present work "ground" and "land" are interchangeable.
   5This excludes from the present discussion geological funds which are depleted by use.
                                                                                  I
                                                                           145
     Fixed location is also the key to land's unique relation to the inter-
dependency question. Water service that opens up new lands1 for example,
requires the complezrxentation of sewers, houses for customers, and
ultimately the whole complex of transport—utility lines that make a finished
community. The water service requires these complements not just any..
where but serving the same lands. The services achieve necessary scale
economies by finding many customers not just anywhere, but compactly
grouped in space.
     The importance to welfare economics of land's natural origin and
permanence is in the unique suitability those qualities give land as the base
of a lump-sum "capacity-tax," a neutral nondistorting tax not contingent
on man's creating the tax base by storage or saving, not avoidable by
consuming or removing it. The only contingency is that the landholder
retain title, but a financial flight from land titles removes no square foot
from the supply. Ad valorem land taxes are simply capitalized into lower
land prices and the net outcome is to substitute a tax burden for an interest
burden, explicit or implicit. Insofar as that shift would cause reallocation
of the fixed supply it is by the removal of a distortion -- - unequal access to
credit -- - and not (assuming accurate assessment) by the imposition of a
new distortion.
     Natural origin and permanence of ground give it a unique place in the
distributional ethic. Ground rent as private income is without functional
rationale, as generations of economists have duly, if discreetly, noted.
It neither elicits the supply nor preserves it. It only serves to allocate it
to the high bidder, but this function is so badly distorted by speculation in
anticipated increments to the market price of infinite future rents, as
almost any city planner will document, that there is reason to believe
public rent collection through heavy lump-sum ad valorem capacity taxes
could serve the allocative function better.
    When, however, we claim uniqueness of the ground in its fixity of
supply we run afoul of the new conventional wisdom which preaches a blur-
ring of such discriminations. Some leading arguments are these: man can
increase the land supply; rent is one of many differentials; Roger Mans can
earn more slugging than soda-jerking; labor supply is wage-inelastic;
capital formation is interest-inelastic. Let us entertain them in order.
     When urban economists speak of increasing land supply they apparently
have in mind such operations as extending expressways and sewer mains,
bringing new lands into the urban sphere. Farm economists who speak
of 'elastic" land supplies in turn have in mind reclamation and clearing.
Cities may take land from orchardists, they from pig-farmers, who push
on wheat-farmers. Wheat-farmers push on cattlemen, they on sheepmen,
they on forestry, recreation, and the Indians, but none of that, as the
displaced persons keep reminding us, creates new land. It intensifies the
use of land formed when the Earth was young.
     Similarly we intensify the use of labor when it grows relatively dear,
and of capital. We do not describe that as creating new labor and capital,
although over some range it substitutes for such creation. But in addi-
tion we actually do spawn new people, and store up net new capital. There
is the difference.
     The idea that rent means "differential" is I believe a case of con-
founding the incidental with the essential. The concept of rent arose to
help explain why men should pay for something Nature supplied gratis,
courtesy of the house. Its expositors, following Ricardo, have taken note
 146

  that lands differ in quality per acre and command different rents per acre.
 Some writers have Siezed upon that difference as the essence of rent, but
  it is a secondary aspect.6 Rent arises because land is scarce relative to
 dema.rjd and would arise in that circumstance if land were uniform.
       The public celebrity analogy projects a resemblance between ground
 rent, a payment Without the function of eliciting supply, and the income of
 theatrical and athletic 5tars who allegedly enjoy their work, are good for
 little else, and would work as much for less money. The analogy falls on
 two counts.
     First, the alleged rental component of the star's income is indefin-
 able. It is supposed to be the excess of his star income over his oppor-
 tunity cost. Expositors describe that best alternative as remote and ill-
 rewarded: BB as a scrubwoman, Roger Mans as a teacher. Thus they
 make most of star-income a rent. But the alternatives are arbitrary and
 the rent is rubber. There is a whole range of closer alternatives, and
 what is rent and what is not depends entirely on the one specified, until
 we have Roger playing for another team, and Brigitte for another audience,
 near their present fees, and their rent vanishes into earned income.
       Second, ground rent is a macro-economic concept, that is it applies
 to the whole class of land incomes without reference to allocation among
 different industries or uses. It would obtain if all land and labor were
 homogeneous and produced but one commodity. It is distinguished from
 wages by the curse of Adam that labor toward suppertime grows irksome,
 and at all times represts a sacrifice of pleasant diversions. Wages in
 general serve the neces Mary function of enticing man from leisure. Rent
 in general evokes no Supply response: the Creator never sees it.
      If the remolders of terms and issues must describe celebrity income
 as "rent" let them at least spare the original term uncorrupted, and the
language unimpoverished by qualifying their concept as "micro-rent" or
"transfer-rent." Then their readers could divine that land income is
double-rent,  macro and micro. The block at 34th and 5th Avenue, that
is, that sustains the Empire State Building, is not only given freely by
Nature, like true love Without demand for requitement or threat of remov-
al, but also might be a potato patch. And so its million-dollar yearly
ground income is 100% rent and also 99. 99%, double-damned to damn
Brigitte once. No doubt we are all poor sinners, as the micro-rent con-
cept intimates, who if We got what we deserve wouldn't get much. But
among economic sinners, the ground rent collector holds a unique
pre -eminence.
     Those who regard Wages as a form of rent have another string to
their bow, however. They note that incomes are higher today than in
1900 but hours are shorter. Post hoc ergo propter hoc:_pay them more
and they work less. The argument of the road gang boss has been com-
mandeered by the modern Cameralist. Wages do not elicit labor; labor
is perversely elastic to wage rates.
     The argument might be neater if ceteris were paribus. Over sixty
years many things have changed. Today among other new things we have
steeply progressive inCotne tax rates, more accumulated wealth, longer
subsidized schooling, bi unions, seniority and tenure, reduced inter-
professional wage differfltials social security, Freud, protection from
    6lndeed, the area unit is  4rbitrary one within which to define quality and supramarginal
ranking. Low-valued acres mv tn some extensive uses produce more per man than high-yielding
ones, be higher above the marg,,, and slower to go out of use when costs rise or prices fall.
                                                                                               147

immigration, and Miltown to bank the inner fires of workmanship, and it
is a violent assumption to attribute all our modern otiosi.ty to high wage
rates. But is long-run response really relevant at all? Insofar as higher
wages over time are responsible for reducing hours it is by helping us
accumulate the wherewithal to put a higher price on leisure. The price
we put on our leisure is not a function of the wage of our marginal efforts
at a given moment, but of the wages we got yesterday and expect tomor-
row, our property income, government checks, and a variety of things.
The money we get for working from 4 to 5 P. M. on Friday, December
22, 1961 is necessary to elicit the supply under the conditions of that
moment. In that sense wages are functional where ground rent is not.
     The new conventional wisdom also has it that we save and create
capital more or less by reflex, so that interest7 is a rent, too. It would
be presumptuous in a few words to sum up decades of debate around and
about this topic, but the lagging rate of capital formation in the United
States during three decades of the new wisdom at least gives us license
to wonder if the last word was spoken when the rentier was consigned to
euthanasia. A land economist suspects that interest rates do affect
capital formation, if not directly then through their effect on asset values
and especially land values, with their high interest-elasticity. High land
values, the result of low interest rates, satisfy without benefit of real
capital formation their holders demand for assets and so tend to weaken
saving.
      It also seems obvious, land values or not, that at zero interest we
could live by borrowing indefinitely and would give up not only saving but
our jobs and all unpleasantness, deprivation, and restraint whatsoever.
The Gesellniks can hardly dodge that dilemma by pleading credit ration-
ing, for at the end of the credit line lies capital scarcity and an interest
rate. Zero interest is clearly a fantasy in which we would run through the
accumulations of centuries in a few glorious days. As Natura non facit
saltum, it is plausible to suppose that near approaches toward zero
interest would likewise tend to discourage capital formation.
     In a closed economy the effects of farther approaches toward zero
interest would make interesting debating. But as a practical matter the
issue is seldom so drawn. Taxing jurisdictions are defined as specific
land areas, from which capital will flee for light and transient causes,
while you can tax the very all out of the land and never a square foot wilr
rise up and walk out of town.
     In summary, when we speak of "rent' we mean an income share that
appertains specifically to land and which is likened to other distributive
shares only by specious analogies which never should have risen above the
dignity of debaters' ruses.

                GROUND RENT AS A CONSTRAINT ON LAND USE
                     BY ATOMISTIC PARCELHOLDERS
    Ground rent is a "surplus, " we have maintained, differentiated from
other distributive shares in lacking the function of eliciting the aggregate
supply.
       personally prefer profit to denote the net return on stored capital realized         reserv-
ing interest as the price of money reflecting exante anticipations. 8ut this is not the place to
open that box and I here use 'interest' in the classical sense.
148

      But factor payments serve two functions. Besides calling forth the
 aggregate supply they ration it among competing demands. Re.sèrves
 the second function quite as much as do other shares. "Rent," wrote
Ely and Wehrwein, "acts as the 'sorter' and 'arranger' of this pattern
(of land use)." Rent pre-empts the choicest sites for uses that most need
their advantages, and ranks land uses in order of rent-paying capacity.
 The body of lore called "location theory" advanced by Thiinen, Weber,
Lsch, Hoover, Dunn, Isard, and others elaborates at length on this
principle, so that the allocative function of rent is not only received but
embellished doctrine.
     The systematic and comprehensive welfare economist, however, must
feel that land and location economists have not fully established the
economic rationale of rent in a quantitative sense. They have rationalized
the qualitative function of ranking land uses, but have slighted the quanti-
tative function of arbitrating the margins between landholdings: just how
much. land should each firm occupy, and at what intensity? They have
given us no demonstration that the rent of central sites serves optimally
to constrain landholders from expanding and thereby imposing private
and social costs on utilities and peripheral land users who must traverse
their holdings. They have generally been content to accept private trans-
port-utility costs as equal to social costs, even though that is conspicuously
untrue, and have asked no very deep questions about the nature of social
transport costs, nor therefore about the effect of land occupancy on those
costs.
      The geo-welfare economist would note with approval that location
 theorists demonstrate that individuals with greater demands on transport
 tend to locate centrally, thereby tending to minimize transport costs, at
least the part paid by individuals. That is important information. But
transport costs also vary with the over-all intensity of land use. If all
land users, preserving their ordinal ranking, were to double their land-
holdings, they would much increase the miles they, their supplies,
customers, and products had to travel, and very likely the social costs per
mile as well. 8
     Clearly, an important function of rent is to constrain such extension,
to the end of minimizing aggregate transport costs and maximizing pro-
ductive linkages. Clearly, too, this is one of the more interesting
questions in an era of rapidly increasing per capita space use, both urban
and rural. But it is a question on which the geo-welfare economist finds
precious little guidance. Transportation economics has yet to be inte-
grated with land and location economics.
     The interrelations are rather extended. For example, suppose it
be true that at urban fringes, private transport-utility costs are less
than social costs. That would first, obviously, open up excess peripheral
lands. But that in turn would relax rental constraints on intramargirial
lands, and reduce intensities there below economical levels. This in its
turn would disperse population wider, and impose more transport costs
on the society that underwrites them. The burdens imposed by uneconom-
ical transport rates are not simply the obvious short run misuse of sunk
social overhead, but the long run thinning of land settlement, the reloca-
tion of population, with demands for further extension of subsidized
    8Hoovers and Dunn's assumption of decreasing costs per mile refers only to private costs in
trucking. Social overhead costs are another matter--unit costs rise as trade territory density
declines.
                                                                                149
transport facilities. Those are the extended interactions of land use and
transport-utility rates that a geo-welfare economist would want worked
out explicitly.
Rent as a Constraint on Spatial Extension
     Let us begin with the atomistic individual landholder and define the
positive expansive force within, against which the constraint of external
opportunity cost must contend at every margin. Rent is too crude a term
for this kind of quantitative analysis — rent is an average concept, and
we need a marginal one. If rent from an integral land-using operation is
the average net product per acre, the outthrusting force is not that, but
the marginal net product, which we can call "marginal rent," which may
be higher or lower than the average depending on whether the operation is
too small or too large. While that may seem obvious to any marginalist
economist, it has not to my knowledge been explicitly developed in the
literature, and certaixily its implications are widely flouted. Let us then
develop the concept of marginal rent.
     To proceed step by step, first abstract from scale by assuming con-
stant returns. Let us also at first abstract from the transport question
and discuss simple adjacent farrnholdings on homogeneous soil and with-
out significant location differences. That leads directly to some inter-
esting welfare conclusions about equilibria at the margins between adjacent
landholdings.
    In Figure 1 we signalize the assumption of constant returns by plotting
on the abscissa not land alone, but the ratio of land to complementary
inputs. The two solid curves represent per acre figures: Average Gross
Revenue per acre (AGR); and Average Complementary Costs per acre

                                                                                      I
                                                                                      4




                                                  A        S

                             LAND IN ACRES PER COMPLEMENT



Figure 1. Complementary Costs, revenues, and derived average and marginal net
products of land with assumed constant returns to scale.
150

(ACC). The ACC curve is a rectangular hyperbola.9 AGR behaves as any
conventional average product curve, showing the result of varying pro-
portions on output. Note that "average" here means "per acre," and not
"per unit of output.
      The vertical span between AGR and ACC, their difference, is Aver-
age Net Revenue (ANR), or rent, which is also graphed separately (dash
line). ANR, of course, peaks farther to the right than AGR peaks. Note
the characteristic lenticular form of the area between the AGR and ACC
curves. It is a form we will meet several times.
      The most interesting curve is the last, Marginal Net Revenue (MNR),
or marginal rent, and the most interesting thing about it for the present
analysis is the contrast it draws between two firms, one of which is a
little too intensive (at A), and the other of which is a little too extensive
(at C). The average net value of land is the same to each, and if that
were our sharpest tool we would be at a loss to choose between them, and
to allocate marginal acres between them. But we would probably give the
acres to C because it is very much the fashion these days to applaud lower
costs per acre and overlook output per acre, and that would be exactly
wrong because the marginal rent, the proper arbiter of boundaries, is
much higher for A.
      The curves of Figure 1 do not exaggerate how quickly marginal rent
falls with a slight decline of average rent. Table 1 is a numerical exam-
ple of such a relationship. Marginal rent falls from 15 down to minus 3
while average rent barely changes.
Table 1: Relations of average and marginal gross and net revenues with declining intensity of land
           is e
    (1)            (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)     (9)
   Land           Gross
                   Average Marginal Comple- Average     Net   Average Marginal
(Acres Per Revenue Gross    Gross   mentary Cornple- Revenue Net        Net
Complement) (GR)   Revenue Revenue   Costs  mentary    (NR)   Revenue Revenue
            .       (AGR)  (MGR)*    (CC)    Costs    (2)—(5)  (ANR)  (MNR)*
                          (2)—(l)                           (ACC)                  (7)—(l)
                                                            (5}—(l)

                                         4                                                    4
       1            4        4.0                   42        42.0        -38       -38.0
                                        16                                                   16
       2           20       10.0                   42        21.0        -22       -11.0
                                        17                                                   17
       3           37       12.3                   42        14.0        -5        - 1.7
                                        16                                                   16
       4           53       13.3                   42        10.5         Il         2.8
                                        15                                                   15
       5           68       13.6                   42         8.4         26         5.2
                                        13                                                   13
       6           81       13.5                   42         7.0         39         6.5
                                        10                                                   10
       7           91       13.0                   42         6.0         49         7.0
                                         6                                                    6
       8           97       12. 1                  42         5. 3        55         6.9
                                         0                                                    0
       9           97       10.8                   42         4. 7        55         6. 1
                                        —3                                                   -3
      10           94       9.4                    42         4.2         52         5.2
*MGR and MNR are here identical, because Marginal Complementary Costs (MCC) are zero,
 throughout.
 MGR and MNR are tabulated between rows because they represent changes between the defined
 values of Gross Revenue.
  9Deterrnined by the definition of the abscissa, of which it is the reciprocal.
                                                                                            151
     The implication of all that is that, insofar as our analysis compre-
 hends the relevant considerations, adjacent users of similar land for
 similar purposes should be drawn by the rental constraint toward com-
 parable intensities, with due allowance for differences of managerial
energy and skill. We cannot rationalize the extensive use of valuable land
by citing lower costs per acre, higher output per man, and that sort of
thing. The relevant driving force is the marginal rent of land and it is,
given the rein, a strict taskmaster.
     But need we limit the conclusion to land used "for similar purposes?"
I think not. Let the ACC curve of Figure 1 be an envelope type curve,
representing not just the best adjustment to different intensities of pro-
ducing one product, but the best adjustment of products to each intensity
as well. Adjust the other curves, all measured in the economist's uni-
versal ruler, to the new definition of ACC. Their positions and curvatures
will change, but not their basic shapes nor critical intersections, nor the
conclusion they impose on us. Of two uses yielding the same rent per
acre, the more intensive should, in a perfect market, acquire marginal
lands from the less until the intensities are equal.
     The observation of extensive land uses persisting in central places
on valuable sites has seemed to call for rationalizations, such as those of
Ely and Wehrwein. Bat it is also possible that these are evidences of
badly distorted markets. I do not believe that a meticulous geo-welfare
economist would give the standard apologetics very long shrift. He would
even find the assumption of managerial differences stretched beyond
capacity. He would insist that a perfect market should achieve an equi-
marginal balance at the fence lines: that the outthrusting force of operator
A should be the marginal rent of land to him, and the opportunity cost
surrounding and constraining him should be the marginal rent of land to
his neighbors, like C. He would have to deplore the failure of most land
economists to apply such a standard in their judgments and comparisons.
Rent as a Constraint on Scale
     Or is it just that he doesn't yet understand the marvels of large-scale
production? Let us now drop the assumption of constant returns to scale,
retaining yet however the homogeneous soil, and locational indifference.
The analysis changes surprisingly little, so long as we limit it to atomistic
individual landholders who do not capture many of their own external
economies. Land, to the atomistic landholder, is much more divisible
than labor or buildings or machinery, so that scale economies are almost
synonymous with spreading the overhead of large capital and labor inputs
over more land. Thus the scale question can be analyzed as a variation
of the intensity theme. The necessary adaptations are in Figure 2.
     Figure 2 differs from Figure 1 in these ways: the abscissa is now
simply acres, instead of acres per complement; ACC is no longer a
rectangular hyperbola but is appreciably flatter, being an envelope repre-
senting optimal adjustment in all respects to increased acreage, of which
adjustments reduced intensity is only one;'° MNR is no longer identical
with MGR but lesser, because MCC are now positive (in Figure 1 they
were zero;) MNR intersects AGR to the left of the latter's peak, or not
   10When scale economies spring from landholders' entrapping their own external economies, the
ACC curve may rise over some range. But ANR still traces a lenticular figure, so that comparable
conclusions emerge.
 152



              I.
              I.
        -J
        -J
        0
        0
              It
        'U
              I0
        Ill        AGR

        'U
                                                                                   ACC
        0     I
        I—
        (4    4
        0
              2                                                                     ANR
                          ANR
              0'
                                              4
                                                   I8 C
                                          LAND IN ACRES

   Figure 2. Costs, revenues, and derived average and marginal net products of land with
   increase of scale.
 at all; and AGR peaks nearer the peak of ANR, at least relatively so,
because of the flatness of ACC, and AGR (which is easy to measure) be-
comes more nearly normative. 1
      The essential lenticular shape of the ANR curve is still with us;
likewise the normative value of its peak, its intersection with MNR, which
now represents optimal scale as well a.s intensity.
      As before, the most interesting curve is MNR, and this time it draws
a pointed contrast between the firm at A which is a little too small, and
another at C which is a little too large. Their average rents (ANR) are
the same. But the marginal rent curve (MNR), which the geo-welfare
economist insists on, reminds us that in private as in public welfare
economics it is not good practice to let the supramarginal parts of an
operation carry the submarginal. There are substantial social gains from
transferring marginal acres from the too-large firm to the too-small, so
long as the latter remains viable.
      In its long love affair with scale economies, the profession of agri-
cultural economics has tended to overlook such nagging marginal consider-
ations. It has leaned heavily on that falling ACC curye to the neglect of
the others. Geo-welfare economists have a mission to bring equimar-
ginalism into the picture. We have come to imagine small farmers as
weak and inferior, to be preserved, if at all, only for sentimental, mili-
tary, or sociologicalu reasons. But in terms of the marginal revenue
productivity of additional lands for their cramped holdings, overmanned,
overimproved, and perhaps overequipped relative to their land base, some
of them must be as ravening wolves. Just what keeps those wolves behind
fences should make an interesting study in market imperfections.
    ''It is worth signalizing the implications of the last point. The great emphasis of production
economists on minimizing costs per acre may be misleading. If we must emphasize a single cri-
terion of good combination of inputs, maximum output per acre (AGR) comes closer to the norm.
                                                                                                  153

     The scale question now appears as an aspect of the intensity ques-
tion. 12 Rent is more than a constraint on "extensity" abstracted from
scale. In the process it assumes a key role as an absolute limit on scale,
because it is one cost that does not decrease with scale. That i3 most
obvious n the short run: as one expands his landholding he presses on his
neighbors and meets increasing costs per acre. In the long run the cost
of homogeneous land is constant, while the cost of land within finite dis-
tributive networks tends, as we see later, to increase.
     By contrast, there are definite economies in larger buildings, larger
rooms, larger machines, and so on. One doubles the floor space of a
house, for example, without doubling the building cost. The role of rent
as a constraint on scale is well exemplified by observing the evolution of
autos and trucks, which are partly exempted from the constraint thanks
to public underwriting of progressively wider and straighter streets and
highways, and vehicle taxes based on criteria other than space occupancy.
As the roads widen and straighten the vehicles widen and lengthen, and if
they were publicly garaged, too, might eventually approach the dimensions
of yachts and railroad cars. When they have to pay for the space they
pre-empt, or when traffic congestion applies a constraint, they shrink
again. 13
     Another aspect of land's special role in limiting scale economies is
that the MCC required to integrate fringe lands with a firm's operating
center include rising internal transportation costs. The essence of a
firm's individuality, and hence of scale economies it may realize, is its
integral organic nature centered about some nucleus like a farmstead.
Land added to a firm is marginal not just in quantity, but in location
relative to the nucleus. Increasing internal transportation costs result
from both longer lines and, after some point, overcongestion at the nucle-
us. The TNEC Fetterites and others have pointed to analogous disecono-
mies in the administrative nexus, but the geo-welfare economist need not
reason by analogy. The long lines and congested centers are physical
facts.
     And so the landholder adding an acre to his operation must discount
its net product for remoteness in space, just as he does future net prod-
ucts for remoteness in time. But whereas we swim through time to-
gether, we occupy different points in space, and one man's remoteness
is another man's proximity. As A encroaches on B, therefore, the MNR
of land falls to A, but rises to B, constraining the encroachment and
limiting economies of scale.
     Yet a third way in which rent serves to constrain scale of firms is by
penalizing the lavish use of land-time that characterizes large-scale
operations. Large scale of capital inputs is associated, as a rule, with
durability, and the economy depends on spreading initial costs over a long
period. Annual rent, an inexorable function of time, is a serious brake on
   lZOne could also interpret the risk question as a variation of the intensity theme, but space
limitation precludes that here.
   131n the example, road space, although partly a human product, is made analogous to bare land,
which is entirely a natural product. I do not allege that road space is generally synonymous with
land -- cnly analogous, in the particular example, and in the short run. In the long run, streets
and roads and highways may be widened, and in that process the unique role of rent as a constraint
on scale is manifest in the contrast between rural roads, where land is 'a minor cost, and downtown
streets, where land is the major cost. Widening rural roads, we meet decreasing costs per foot of
width; widening city streets, we meet sharply rising costs, as the street clips off the fronts of small
and valuable lots.
154
all such grand conceptions. We proceed next to chrorio-welfare economics:
the role of rent as a constraint on extension in time.

Rent as a Constraint on Temporal Extension
      Extension in space, with fixed- complementary inputs, obviously makes
land use less intense by spreading the fixed or indivisible inputs over more
land. It is a little less obvious, but equally important, that one reaches a
 similar end by spreading fixed inputs over more land-time. One does this
by letting buildings depreciate and yet survive over many years at low
values unrenewed, thus encroaching on the time-margin of land use.
      The primary constraint on this temporal extension is again rent,
which the chrono-welfare economist views as part of the marginal cost
of time. Rent as an opportunity cost puts land uses under pressure not
just from all sides but from the future. Rent is not the only marginal cost
of time--all costs have a time vector. But rent behaves in time as in
space, that is it holds up inexorably at fixed or rising levels as one
approaches the margins of decision where other costs as a rule taper off.
      The usual capital input occupying land depreciates and obsolesces
with time and has little, no, or negative salvage value toward its senility.
Without rent, old buildings would almost never be demolished. On a base
of zero any return is infinite. Along Park Avenue today a sound 30-story
building has just fallen to the wreckers' ball to release the site for a
larger modern improvement. The same building in St. Louis, or another
part of Manhattan, would sttrvive another half-century; in Aberdeen, S. D.,
perhaps two centuries; in Malta Bend, Mo., until it fell of its own weight,
for it could always be used for storing grain, or old equipment, and
ultimately for disposing of junk. There is always a use, however humble,
for an old building. If the site beneath has no salvage value there is no
limit to economic life but sheer physical collapse.
      This function of rent is known to urban land economists, and ably
expounded by Ratcliffe, but somehow it has never found its way into the
main body of production economics which has tended to remain not only
spaceless but timeless. Open almost any tome on cost analysis or price
or production economics and you will see the axes labeled "Input A" or
"Output B" with no reference to the time unit assumed, or the method of.
annualizing fixed costs. It is to the credit of Boulding that he has made
the effort to apply marginal analysis to time economics, but he has con-
cluded--I believe mistakenly--that marginal analysis there breaks down.'4
Literature on capital theory has tended to neglect both marginal analysis
and the role of ground rent. I hope I am not preaching to the converted,
therefore, in expanding on the role of rent as a temporal constraint.
     The rental constraint on time-extension operates more specifically
as follows. Let us adopt Terborgh's expressive wording and describe old
and new rivals for a site as "defenders" and "challengers." The time to
salvage an old site arrives when the defender's current annual income net
of operating costs falls below the top challenger's anticipated annualized

   14Kenneth Boulding, Economic Analysis (3rd edition) (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1955),
Chapter 39. For a criticism see Mason Gafmney, 'Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber,'
A. E. Info. Series No. 62 (Raleigh: North Carolina State College, 1957 and 1960), pp. 45-52. See
also p. 54, which seeks a reconciliation -- it is not alleged that Bouiding is entirely wrong, by any
means.
                                                                          155

rent net of all costs. Note that we are biased for the defender because
its capital costs are already sunk and rionsalvageable, so in the marginal
comparison we deduct no charge on sunk capital, neither depreciation,
obsolescence, nor interest. What's done is done and historical costs are
irrelevant even if embodied in outstanding debt.
     The challenger's annualized net rent is a more difficult concept.
Since the challenger is typically not another firm but another land use
contemplated by the same firm we have little excuse to assume this rent
has been correctly determined "externally." We will have to compute it
ourselves.
     A new use usually entails heavy initial costs, compensated by revenues
tapering off over many future years until the next challenger succeeds to
the site. The entire cycle of investment and liquidation is an indivisible
unit that must be evaluated as a whole.
     The challenger's rent must be an average of its performance over
time. A simple mean will not do, however, for in addition to the quantities
of costs and revenues, we must consider their distribution in time. A
"time-average" is necessary. This is found by annualizing all costs and
revenues--for brevity let us henceforth say simply "net revenues.
Annualizing a quantity of given time-position, ii, means finding the amount,
call it a, which if received as a constant annual sum from now to 11
would be of equal present value with the said quantity received once at n.
     Net revenues in the terminal year, t, are annualized by the following
standard formula:

    a=
         iR
         (l+i)t 1                                                     (1)
where R is net revenue, us the relevant interest rate, and t is the
terminal age of the improvement.
    Net revenues in any other year, n, are annualized by compounding
them forward to the terminal year, t, before applying the annualizing
operations of equation (1). Thus the complete annualizing formula is:

    a         R(l+ i)t_
         (1+ j)t — 1                                                  (Z)

It only remains to select the value for t that maximizes a, which one may
do in a number of ways.
     It reassures one's faith in marginal analysis to note that one way of
doing so is to find the year when R a, that is when the marginal revenue
of time (Rn) equals the marginal cost of time (a). In the first years of
heavy initial costs the values of R1, R2, and so on may be less than a, and
ordinarily will be even less than zero as the initial costs are counted as
negative revenues. That is inevitable in the nature of long-term improve-
ments. But toward the later years any value of R which fell below the
running time-average, a, established by preceding years, and not repre-
senting a new investment to be requited by later revenues, would lower
the time-average of the whole and call for demolition and renewal.
     Which is also to say that in time analysis, as in space analysis, and
as in the timeless-spaceless abstract analysis on which economists still
 156

 nourish their young. a marginal revenue intersects the corresponding
 average revenue function where the latter is a maximum.
      The accelerated replacement constrained by rent is a form of intensi-
fication of land use, as one would expect from the operation of a land
constraint. Without the constraint the individual's motivation would be to
 squeeze the last drop of income from the initial inputs by spreading them
over as much land-time as they would endure, thus minimizing the time-
average of his costs without regard to the time-average of his revenues.
      The intensity that the time-constraint encourages is of a sort that is
not necessarily obvious if we should observe the static ratio of land to
improvement at any given point of time. Intensity over time takes the
form of faster turnover of improvements, rather than heavier initial im-
provements. Rent as a spatial constraint, it is true, prompts heavier
initial improvements, but rent as a temporal constraint, chopping off the
last years of each cycle, puts a premium rather on quick recoverability of
capital, on flexibility and speedy replacement. Rent penalizes the ponder-
ous and the monumental, and so has a tempering influence on initial costs.
Its influence is rather toward maximizing volume of business, the joint
product of capital times turnover. It is worth emphasizing that this rapid
turnover of a nation's capital is a major factor tending to enhance employ-
ment opportunities for labor. 15 Conversely, all factors that weaken the
operation of rent as a time-constraint tend thereby to reduce employment
opportunities.
      This influence of rent is pervasive, affecting not only buildings but
the daily use of rooms, floors, and shelf space. Rent is no less the
executioner of the creaking lathe and the stale bread than of the firetrap
apartment and the tired orchard. A high-rent economy is one that econo-
mizes on land-time by introducing a note of urgency into all phases of life.
     Rent is not, however, entirely the enemy of quality, substance and
durability. It is an optimizing force that abhors extremes. While it does
not let the minimization of time-average costs dominate decisions to the
extent of overlooking time-average revenues, neither does it the opposite.
It rather strikes a golden mean, maximizing the excess of time-average
revenues over time-average costs.
       In Equation (2) we submerged this relationship by combining revenues
and costs in one inscrutable expression, R. Let us now express them
separately and observe graphically a typical interplay of the              time-averages
of costs and revenues with increasing life of improvements (Figure 3).
     Here we see the now familiar lenticular shape of average net revenue
(ANR), manifesting the same general principle as in Figures 1 and 2, only
here applied to spreading fixed costs over time instead of space. The
rental constraint precludes indefinite rightward drift because the slight
decline of time-average costs is offset by the sharper decline of time-
average revenues The rental constraint does not however drive us clear
back to the maximum of time-average revenues at A, for there time-
average costs are too high. It drives us rather to B, where the curves
are parallel and farthest apart, and time-average rent is a maximum.
     The systematic chrono-welfare economist would now want to explore
many more dimensions of this analysis and fill in many missing details.
He would want to trace the behavior of the challenger's marginal net

  15Cf. Knut Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy, Vol. I, General Theory. trans. E. Classen
(New York: The Macmillan Company, 1934), pp. 127 ff.
                                                                                     157



              'I


        'U
              4I




              I
        'U
              •0
        'U
        I..                                                                RVEMIES
              I
              'I




                                      TIME IN YEARS

              Figure 3. Time-averages of costs and revenues over building life.

product of land-time and assure hirnseLf that it equalled average net prod-
uct at the latter's peak. He would want to trace out optimal interteinporal
marginal arbitration when the challenger's future was constricted by an
impending higher use so that his average net product could not be maxi-
mized--and he would discover he could improve a good deal on the "ripen-
ing-cost" apologetics of R. T. Ely. He would want to adapt his analysis
to land uses like stock-feeding in which the capital appreciates over time- -
there he would discover the German forester Martin Faustmann to have
anticipated him by over a century. But in this wide survey we must leave
the question here.

Rent as an Expression of Traversal Costs
     Our geo-chrono-welfare economist is now equipped, albeit crudely,
for an excursion into transport costs and their relation to land use.
     Rent serves to constrain excessive pre-emption of space generally,
but most particularly of space that others must traverse. It is a most
important principle for the layout and rating of transport-utility networks
that the force of the constraint equal the increased traversal costs im-
posed by extension of land occupancy. While that may appear a welfare
truism, it has not to my knowledge been formally expounded, and its
policy implications are widely ignored both in practice and theory.
     Let us suppose a row of five plots, equal in all qualities save location,
running uphill from a common source of free water, S. A Water District
serves them from a common pipeline, delivering to the uphill corner of
each plot. Pipe capacity fits demand all along the line, declining after
each outlet gate, in the likeness of an untelescoped telescope, but with
enough excess capacity to permit a small adjustment.
     Water is free at the source but not at the outlets. Service at each
outlet is priced optimally to cover marginal costs, in a graduated manner
we detail later. Now it is enough to note the water users feel the full
social costs, exemplified by pumping, so that each successive user pays
a higher rate.
158

     In Figure 4 the capacity needed for each plot is represented by a line
running from its service outlet to the water source, S. The plots are
designated in ascending order, A, B, C, D, and N. N is the marginal
plot, and as our curtain rises it is dry-farmed.


                                                                            .1




             Figure 4. Schematic diagram of water service to hillside parcels.



     In order for each plotholder to justify his tenure, both total and
marginal, in the court of welfare economics, he must impute a marginal
rent to the land as great as the traversal costs he imposes on landholders
above, all of whom his presence pushes one slot uphill and who must pay
for lifting water past his entire holding.
     Let us concentrate on the margin between A and B. It is now affected
by more complex factors than in our earlier example where location was
unimportant. The outthrusting force of A is still the marginal rent he
imputes, but B's resistance is tempered by his higher water rates, because
he can encroach on C whose land is cheaper, or move to N. B has in fact
a large family of interesting alternatives to scan, but for an introduction,
the basic forces are exhibited by supposing A to buy plot B outright, and
B to skip up to plot N. We now make that supposition.
      When B leapIrogs over C and ID to plot N he leaves C and ID virtually
unaffected, so the costs imposed on society are largely summarized in
 the costs felt by B. That is encouraging, for it suggests that B will require
 of A a price for plot B, or any slice thereof, equalling the social costs of
his total or partial move uphill. Such a price would constrain A optimally.
     The costs imposed on B are those of acquiring land at N, hopefully at
the price of its marginal rent without water; the cost, of lifting water past
plots C, D, and N; and the loss of producer surplus on the water that he
took at plot B but now thinks submarginal at the higher pumping cost.
     It is encouraging, too, further to note that the additional pumping costs
imposed on B equal the sum of everyone's cost of traversing the land onto
which A has expanded. That is, B's cost of pumping one supply past three
plots, (C, ID, and N,) represented by the dash line in Figure 4, equals the
cost of pumping three supplies, for B, C, and ID, past one plot (B.) Thus
the new transport costs imposed on society are the costs of traversing
A's new territory. The removal of B to plot N gives the same result as
                                                                                T




                                                                         159

though A's expansion had simply boosted B, C, and D uphill in order.
     So far, then, it seems that market rents can be accurate constraints
guiding social economy of central space whose extension imposes traversal
costs on outsiders.
     To be sure the elegant geo-chrono-welfare economist would be aghast
at the crudeness of our model. He would resolve to do a monograph
embellishing the finer points at an early opportunity and lay no claims of
accuracy until that was done.
     But he would also note the futility of piecemeal optimizing. The norma-
tive welfare implications of our pumping model depend utterly on the
assumption that privately felt transport costs equal social costs, and the
fact is they do not. Where is there a water service that graduates rates
with pump lifts? I know of none. Postage-stamp and capricious pricing
are the rules in transport and utilities.
     The location theorists have been content to spin out elaborate detailed
models of lacy geometry on the assumption that pri'ate transport costs
equal social costs, and that is their privilege. But it seems a poor alloca-
tion of their scarce time and abundant talents when not only is the assump-
tion untrue, but no welfare theorist seems to be telling us what normative
rate structures would look like. There is also an economy of economists,
and our geo-chrono-welfare economist would wonder if he shouldn't rather
go back to where Hotelling left us and develop a welfare pricing for trans-
port and utilities as a framework within which to economize on land.
     He would note that if B can get water at plot N and beyond as cheaply
as at plot B, little restrains B from ranging and roaming gaily up the hill-
side, heedless of the costs underwritten by society. Looking back toward
the valley, that release of constraint would cause B to sell plot B too
cheaply, and relieve A of a proper constraint to economize on valley lands.
If the valley lands - - - here made analogous to central city lands - - - had
already, as in actual history, been intensively improved before the release
of constraint, A would make his adjustment in the temporal margin of land
use, reducing intensity over time by letting improvements age without
renewal. Demolition is another name for salvaging land, and if land is
made too cheap, renewal comes too slowly.
     One reason some of the worst slums are found in American cities, of
all places, is the same reason we have some of the world's worst-used
soils, and some of the sloppiest camping manners: rather than renew we
migrate. We have had that nearly-empty frontier, and a series of races
to get out their firstest with the mostest, which seemed to justify the
whole uneconomic process. We have subsidized one after another new
form of transportation, spreading thin the ground rent that otherwise would
have concentrated about the older centers and mandated their intensive
renewal. The result has been careless exploitation at the fringes, and
stagnation at the cores. Periodically, the process has brought on stagna-
tion at the fringes, also, as rents have collapsed following bursts of
overexpansion. Low rents, recall, mean low constraints on the temporal
extension of land uses, hence a freezing of capital turnover, and reduced
employment of labor.
     And so our geo-chrono-weLfare economist's train of thought leads him
back to one of the great figures of welfare economics, Hotelling, who initi-
ated a goodly share of marginal-costing and all that, back in 1938, by
inquiring into criteria for setting railway and utility rates. He now sees
that question as integrally related to a normative economy of land.
160
  THE ROLE OF GROUND RENT IN PLANNING OPTIMAL TRANSPORT-
                   UTILITY NETWORKS

     We now rise above the viewpoint of the atomistic individual land-
holder, to whom rent is an external constraint, and adopt the vantage of
the municipality, or utility, or large land company -- very large, that is --
which is presiding over the layout of a transport-utility network to service
large numbers of atomistic plots. This latter activity is land "development,"
as distinct from the "improvement" of individual plots. It differs from
mere improvement among other ways in this, that development creates
rents on the atomistic parcels served, which parcels capture consumer
surpluses and external economies from tranaport-.utility networks.
Municipalities and large landholders can recapture these spillovers, the
one by taxation and the other by ownership, and use them to help finance
development and to optimize rate structures along the guidelines of welfare
economics. Let us assume a municipality in charge of development, dedi-
cated to practice an art we will call enlightened Ricardian Cameralism, in
the light of the best geo-chrono-welfare economics. What policies should
it adopt for distributing water from a single free source?
     To begin, it would mince no words quibbling whether to apply Lerner's
Rule. The logic is inescapable. Price should be equated to marginal cost
in every possible dimension, until the point where the cost of fiddling with
prices exceeds the gains. No enlightened individual land manager would
deny himself the gains of internal equimarginalism, and the enlightened
Ric ardian Caine ralis t can do no less.
     We may abstract from and defer the short-run question by noting that
a planner should aim roughly toward building and sizing so as to equate
long-run marginal costs with the time-average of short-run marginal costs
 over project life - - - a straightforward application of chrono-equimarginal-
 ism. There will be an early developmental stage of excess capacity, with
 short-run costs below long-run costs, and a terminal stage of the opposite.
Here we discuss simply long-run marginal costs.
      We must not be taken in by a specious sort of "increasing cost" that
 appears when we lengthen the pipelines to serve more lands. That is not
a true increasing cost because the product is not homogeneous. "The
product" we are supplying is not water -- that, recall, was assumed free
at the source -- but transportation. We are producing place utilities. As
we carry water farther, costs per gallon rise because the gallons are
carried farther.
     The homogeneous gallon is that delivered to one outlet. There, we
increase the product by delivering more to one buyer at one place. And
there we find decreasing costs, long-run costs, among other reasons
because the cross-section of our pipe grows with the product of the radius
times the circumference.
     The Ricardian Cameralist is therefore selling not one product in
increasing costs, but many products each in decreasing costs. He re-
quires not one indiscriminate rate for the whole, but a graduated structure
rising with distance from the source. Once having freed himself from the
fallacy of regarding his product as homogeneous, he can allocate costs to
each outlet individually, and marginal-cost pricing comes into its own.
     First, note another problem we can solve jointly with the marginal
cost pricing problem. Each outlet represents not just an individual prod-
uct but an individual market, a perfect bilateral monopoly. Society pro-
                                                                         161
tects the buyer from the seller, after a fashion, by regulating rates, but
nothing protects the seller from the non-buyer, the landholder who does
not choose to participate, although the physical nature of space gives the
 seller no choice but to make service available and to invest money in Ca-
pacity traversing the holding. Ricardian Carneralism will give the seller
an equipoise.
      Now the Ricardian Cameralist sets a water rate equalling marginal
cost as allocated to the individual outlet. The resulting deficit he covers
by a lump-sum land-capacity tax on the land served from that outlet. The
tax is a price paid for having water service made available - - an insurance
premium if nothing else - - and a means of collecting consumer surplus.
The landholder is compensated by getting water transported at low margin-
al-cost rates, with the net social gains thereby effected, and by the great
economy of a compact distributive network. He loses the option of keeping
his land out of the system, a welfare question we return to later.
      The problem of allocating pipe costs to individual outlets is straight-
forward. Each section of pipe may be conceived as a large sleeve tele-
scoped full of smaller sleeves. One sleeve is cast off after the pipe
reaches each outlet, until the last outlet is reached by a simple, narrow,
empty sleeve, the core of the pipe. A complete sleeve-length running
clear back to the source, is allocated to each outlet.
      In computing marginal cost the outermost sleeve does multiple duty,
being allocated to each outlet. It is generally the cheapest sleeve per unit
capacity, although the big trunks near the source will in a large system
exhaust their scale economies. The allocation of total costs among
individual parcels does present some complications, but as it is a less
critical question we will not dwell on those here. It is certain, however,
that the outermost sleeve should be allocated to the outermost parcel of
land, for there we have the marginal decision to make: how far to extend
service. That we take up now.
      Marginal cost pricing is commonly criticized for providing no test of
whether an operation is economical overall. It is a strength of Ricardian
Cameralism to supply such a test, for each extension of a system and of
course thereby for the whole. Our sculptor is pressing us for a decision
where to locate his bust to the ancient god Terminus. How do we calcu-
late an answer?
      We have given the peripheral landholder shabby treatment so far, at
least by his lights. We have let rates increase roughly with distance from
the source, and actually somewhat faster because, although we allocate
him the cheap outermost sleeve all the way, toward the end of the line that
sleeve is at or near the expensive inner core. We are not following the
common practice of letting the profitable center of the system carry the
margins. The peripheries are segregated and must stand on their own
feet, receiving only those economies inherent in the large-scale distribu-
tion system in which they participate.
      It is therefore with a clear conscience that the Ricardian Caxneralist
resorts to the ultimate weapons of marginal cost pricing to justify extend-
ing service. Indeed he can do no other, for he will not have exhausted the
last economy inherent in his position until he has done so.
      He has already deployed his penultimate weapons: marginal cost
pricing itself; and allocating the outermost sleeve to the outermost parcel.
He has one other, usually reserved for sick railroads and submarginal
reclamation schemes, but which actually should be marshalled to pinpoint
162
the margins of every distributive network. The ultimate weapon is this:
he measures and recaptures every last shred of consumer surplus and
external economy created by water service -- - his yardstick is a land
assessment and his reaper is a lump-sum ad valorem tax -- - and applies
it to cover the deficits of marginal cost pricing. He proceeds outwards
until the surplus which he creates and reaps just covers the deficit. Thus
far and no further. There we raise the bust to Terminus, the ancient
god of boundaries. Thus we determine the total supply of land within our
System.
    At the termini we can be certain to find costs decreasing more steeply
than further in, because a larger proportion of the sleeves allocated to
the terminal parcel will be near the core. The Ricardian Cameralist
must expect, therefore, to have relatively greater need of the land tax
toward the termini, even though marginal costs and water rates are abso-
lutely higher there. Figure 5 exemplifies the penultimate situation and
makes the points graphically.

                           AC


              00




         -J
         -j
         0
         0    00MR


         s0.
         U)



              40                                                         MC
                   A
         0
                   ———————                                                    AC

                                                 B

                                             M                           MR OF WATER
                                     o
              0        I         2       3   4       S   I   T   5   9   10


                                WATER DELIVERED TO ONE OUTLET


          Figure 5. Costs and revenues of water service to a penultimate outlet.



    As we proceed outwards along the water pipe, the AC curve, which
represents costs allocated to just one outlet, rises bodily. Demand is
here synonymous with the marginal net revenue of water applied to the
land. Total benefits are the area C + D + A. Total costs are C + D + B.
It is economical to extend service until area B waxes to equal or exceed
area A, which in turn wanes as the AC curve ascends.
      In terms of deficits and taxes, the deficit is C ÷ B. Consumer sur-
                                                                        163
plus, captured in land rent, is C + A. The lump-sum land tax can cover
the deficit and still leave some rent unrecaptured so long as A outmeasures
B.
     It is geometrically obvious that as the AC schedule ascends, and we
approach the terminal outlet, the intersection of MC and MR drifts left-
ward, beneath ever steeper reaches of AC, where costs are decreasing
more rapidly, where the net social gains from marginal cost pricing are
greater, and where, as we said, relative reliance on the lump-sum land
tax must be greater.
     Having pushed Ricardian Carneralism to its spatial limit, let us again
don the chrono-welfare hat and return to the short-run vs. long-run
question. When a system is new it should generally be overbuilt, antici-
pating increased demand. In those early years even the central parcels
may exhibit the marginalis tic traits shown in Figure 5, even though the
time-average outcome is to be supramarginal. In those early marginal
years, of course, price should be set to equal short-run marginal cost,
which will be low, and the heavy deficits met by land-capacity taxes,
which also serve as mandatory injunctions on landholders to accelerate
improvement, thereby synchronizing interdependent investments. Thus
at the temporal as at the spatial margins of the system the Ricardian
element of Cameralism assumes greater importance.
     There, then, are the bare bones of a transport-utility rate structure
wherein social transport costs would be privately felt, and it would make
sense to economize carefully on atomistic land parcels by geo-chrono-
welfare principles. It is a system in which rent plays a central role, and
which would in turn profoundly alter the present pattern of rents, were it
applied.
     The proposed system departs radically from present practice. Now,
instead of subsidizing decreasing cost distributive operations we relin-
quish them to the publicans as tax-collecting machines, setting rates to
cover not only average costs but the city deficit as well. With decreasing
costs, and elastic demand, the excess burden from this form of indirect
taxation, especially at the centers of the systems, is awful to contemplate.
     Now, instead of graduating rates with distance we maintain postage-
stamp rates over wide areas, letting surpluses from the center under-
write extensions into no-one-knows how deeply submarginal outlands. In
respect to city streets we may temper the felony with gas taxes, but we
compound it with taxes on vertical transportation, and indeed all manner
of intensification, in private buildings, doubling the bias against the
underfilled third dimension. The predictable result of taxes on downtown
buildings and subsidies to capricious horizontal extensions is the checker-
boarding and leapfrogging that we get.
     Why do we subject ourselves to those hardships? Certainly not be-
cause you and I are the first who ever noticed that transport costs increase
with distance; and lump-sum land taxes have been imposed in some meas-
ure throughout recorded history. The counterforces to Ricardian
Cameralism fall also within the scope of welfare economics, and of them
I would dwell on three most prominent: freedom of choice; economies of
aggregate social scale; and the conflict of distributive equity with alloca-
tive efficiency.
     As to freedom of choice, it strikes many people that to charge a
landholder for transport-utility service whether he wants it or not is to
bereave him of a dimension of freedom in choice, and reduce his welfare.
164
The view is specious, but I believe must yield to deeper values.
     For one, whatever increases the community's net product increases
the individual's free choice, quantitatively of course, and doubtless
qualitatively as well. To permit holdout landholders to disrupt the spatial
integrity of the community is to permit a distance-barrier among all citi-
zens, a barrier to the linkages in space that give richness and reality to
the abstract freedom of choice. There is not a wide range of alternatives
in an isolated homestead at the end of a mud road.
     For another, hyper-individualistic welfare economics may have under-
sold the value of the freedom of men to act in concert. Man is a social
animal, after all, and to allow one or a few holdóuts to veto group projects
and frustrate neighborly co-operation may be carrying a good thing too
far. It certainly implies an interpersonal comparison in which the hold-
outs' freedom to say "No" is ranked above the majority's freedom to act
as a community.
     Last, the alleged loss of freedom is based on an implicit indivisi-
bility, the identification of particular men with particular parcels of
ground. But there is certainly no welfare postulate more basic than that
man is the measure of all things; and an option denied to a square of land
does not deny it to the man. He is not a serf, to the glebe adscript, but
a free agent, master of his fate in society with many alternatives
including other squares of land. In a word, people can move around. We
complicate social problems needlessly if we impute the immobility of land
to the men who own it.
     Once the man is loosed from the matrix we see that Ricardian Canieral-
lam would compensate for the loss of veto power by adding a new dimen-
sion to free choice. Today we can choose different quantities at a given
price; then we could choose the price as well, by choosing the location:
low rates in the center, high at the fringe, and a full spectrum in between.
Let the individual choose freely just which combination of lump-sum land
charge and variable use-rate best suits him. Today we impose a dull uni-
formity on all sites, epitomized in the grid system and postage-stamp
pricing, in a crude gesture toward some pre-monetary barter concept of
distributive equity, with every man's plot made as good as his neighbor's;
Ricardian Cameralism would differentiate sites, fully exploiting and
accentuating the natural advantages of the center, leaving the extreme
peripheries for the misanthrope. To secede from co-operative society
is certainly every man's inalienable right, and worth protecting, but not,
please, right in the middle of it.
     Now let us entertain the second counterforce to Ricardian Garner-
alisrn, the economies to 'aggregate social scale. Ricardian Cameralisrn
may appear to be an introverted and short-sighted policy. Cheap subsi-
dized peripheral transport, as today, helps to widen markets and so open
the way for scale economies at the center. That is a point from which our
examples abstracted by assuming water free at the source. But it is no
problem now to price water at the source, before it enters our pipe price
system, which is only a means of pricing transport. If there are scale
economies at the source they can be optimally encouraged by marginal-
cost pricing. There is no magic in scale economies that exempts them
from comparison with other values in the price balance, and it would be
folly, it is folly, to enshrine them as national idols and sacrifice net
welfare to them.
     But the hyper-scale economist looks beyond the present. If his city,
                                                                           165

his utility company, his region, his agency, his nation doesn't stake
 claim to untapped peripheral resources now, preclusively, some other
 empire-builder may sneak Out there first. While we aren't quite sure
 what we want with the territories today, we certainly don't want those
 other fellows taking over and discrediting all the lies we tell about the
 destinies of our crossroads and its merchantable real estate, our corpora-
 tion and its public shares, etc.
      So to secure those figments of future economies we acquiesce in
 otherwise uneconomical transport-utility extensions. In the process we
 sacrifice true present economies in scale of distribution lines serving
compact populations, economies that come from broadening or thickening
 rather than lengthening lines, economies of a sort to put most modern
American cities in at once both the stages of increasing returns to scale
but negative returns to more space.
      As to the hopeful future economies, it is now some 100 miles across
what passes for the city of Los Angeles, to cite an extreme example, with
precious few possibilities of true economic sharing of common costs
between extremes, and two-thirds of the downtown sterilized by the space
demands of the insolent chariots. The New York Regional Planning
Authority recently estimated a need for $50 billion in the next 25 years
for transport-utilities to reintegrate the fragments of what used to be New
York City. It is noble to sacrifice the present for posterity, but it is
stupid to sacrifice both to an illusion, which we may have let get a little
out of hand, just as our daddies did before us on several immemorial
occasions.
      It would seem wiser for most cities, and analogous distributive or-
ganisms, to grow compactly, at peace with their neighbors, and when the
time came to break out of the shell and integrate with other organisms to
the end of widening markets and achieving scale economies, to do so at
the wholesale and trunk-line level, proceeding in order and the fullness of
time toward complete integration. That would present its problems, to be
sure; but the alternative is the interurban mess we have today.
      Finally, there is the conflict of allocative efficiency with distributive
equity, and there is a counter-dominant to sunder the social fabric indeed.
By this point I trust no reader remains unapprised that the distribution of
utility services in space has an important bearing on that other kind of
distribution - - of income, of wealth, hence ultimately of that other kind of
utility of which the welfare economists write. Setting rates, locating lines
and terminals here instead of there, those are key activities that make or
break the value of lands, and the men who hold their titles.
      Ricardian Cameralism, as sketched out thus far, appears to favor the
center over the circumference. It charges the outer landholder not only a
higher use-rate but a higher lump-sum tax as well, thus abusing him
thrice: initially he received lands less favored by Nature, from those
lotteries of Fate we call history and patrimony, next we would raise his
utility rates; and then, instead of compensation, on his groaning back we
heap the bulk of municipal taxes But that is insufferable. It not only
overburdens the outlanders, it cuts off their escape routes and throws
them back on the mercies of the inner few, mercies not always tender.
Clearly we have developed only a partial philosophy and must think farther.
      Terminus, the god of boundaries, has not found favor in American
history because so often he appeared as an agent of the inner interests, the
Establishment, a sort of sheep dog hounding us to the clipping houses. It
166

 is curious that economists who, since discovering monopoly 30 years ago
 have defined it into every jar and carton on our shelves, have given so few
 words to the most transcendent and entrenched monopoly of all, that com-
 munity of interest of important local landholders organized openly and
 aboveboard as city councils and county boards and state legislatures. But
 the outsiders, although they may not have known acet. par. from a rnut.
 mut., have maintained a healthy skepticism of the Establishment, and
 American history is a series of successful revolts against overcontain-
 ment. George III sculpted Terminus on the Appalachian Trail, the Procla-
 mation Line, and reaped The Revolution. Hamilton tried the Ohio River
 line but got Jefferson and Louisiana. The Whigs tried again and got old
 Hickory and the canal boom. The southern Democrats tried once more
 and got Oregon, Lincoln, transcontinental railroads, the Homestead and
 Morrill Acts, and all the rest. Downtown has tried and reaped the shop-
 ping center. The Budget Bureau tries but cannot contain the Reclamation
 and Flood Control Associations. You cannot hold the American people
 behind fences. Negative containment policies do not work, and we wouldn't
 like them if they did.
      The inner few, therefore, seeing the limits of power, have accommo-
 dated the demand for admission and expansion as befits shrewd cartel
 managers. They are custodians of a surplus, a potential social dividend,
 which we have called ground rent. They need a formula to distribute it
 among their retainers, and they have used for this the atomistic land
 parcel, a quota in the cartel, with postage-stamp utility rates a means
 toward a crude communion, a species of distributive equity, among mem-
 bers. The institution of property in land ceases to be a means toward
 efficient allocation of a resource and becomes (perhaps it always has
 been) a means to maintain a viable political structure. I do not belittle
 the achievement. It is worth some sacrifice.
      How might Ricardian Carneralism resolve the problem and reconcile
 distributive equity with allocative efficiency? The answer clearly lies in
levying on those central rents. The containment effected by graduated
 transport-utility rates would multiply those rents over present levels, and
we could with clear consciences go after them on the welfare principle of
taxing the gains of winners to compensate losers. We could use the same
lump-sum land-capacity tax already described, which would have the im-
portant bonus of converting a large share of the landholder's implicit rent,
a soft .and easy-going sort of constraint, into an explicit cash obligation,
a regular fixed charge, which would increase the leverage of the remaining
net rent and so whet his incentives remarkably.
      The question next arises, which Ricardian Cameralist should collect
those central rents? The local distributive organism has already been
adequately financed from the charges levied as constraints on peripheral
parcelholders. Here is a pleasant sort of dilemma, and the obvious
answer is that the central surpluses are the proper preserve of state or
federal government. From the larger view, indeed, the analogy is almost
perfect between the State-local relationship and the local-individual rela-
tionship. To the State, presiding over trunk highways, power pools,
natural gas lines, interregional canals, and the like, the local distributive
organism is an atornistic parcel, a cell surrounding a nucleus, with
marginal rents declining toward the peripheries, just as in the individual
parcel, and for perfectly analogous reasons: growing internal transport
costs.
                                                                        167
     The ground rents generated at the centers of these local organisms
are but the reflection of natural location advantage, in the larger scheme
of things, plus the artificial enhancements of natural advantages consti-
tuted by the trunk distribution lines that link the cells in the nexus of the
regional, national, and world superorganisms. Ricardian Cameralism
in the larger sense would simply entail applying at the regional and national
levels the same principles already worked out at the local. We might then
discover that an increasing population can live quite comfortably on no
more lands than we presently pre-empt, but a good deal less.
     And so the geo-chrono-welfare econoriist, who began by joshing
welfare economists for dreaming of unattainable Platonic prototypes,
culminates with a model that will strike some readers as farther-out than
any scheme yet hatched by the Cam or the Thames. Yet, so rough and
ready a monarch as William the Norman was able to apportion his feudal
levies among his vassals by the capacity of their lands, and produce in the
Domesday Books a tolerably useful national cadaster. Not long ago most
American States levied directly on every lot and acre, and few would deny
today that State Boards of Equalization assess land more truly than their
local counterparts. Even without any Ricardian Cameralism, the Federal
Bureau of Internal Revenue today must check the market value of every
parcel when it changes hands by sale, gift, or death, and while that is the
thousandth part of its present impossible task, it is virtually the whole of
the Ricardian system. As to overarnbitiousness, the Ricardian system
can be writ small as well as large, approached gradually as well as
abruptly, applied piecemeal as well as whole.
     I do not believe the barrier to Ricardian Cameralism, therefore, lies
in any complexity or remoteness, but only in the minds and customs of
men. Western man has now been pushing back frontiers, and running
away from problems behind him, for some 1500 years, and the realization
has not quite fully broken that the world is round and finite. Without
question the world offers still more frontiers where, with the usual el-
bowing and throat-slitting, we could expand beachheads, but to what avail?
Manifest Destiny has already stretched us thin from sea to shining sea;
world resources may be tapped through trade. With the problem of atomic
survival now uppermost, today's challenge is rather to demonstrate that a
free economy can prosper without forever thrusting outward to encroach
on its neighbors; that it can reorient a vigorous people's aggressions into
heightening and deepening our capital and culture on the land we already
have. Too, we are challenged to find better modes of balancing and
reconciling the legitimate claims of society and individuals, of socialism
and free enterprise. Toward those ends the land economist and the wel-
fare economist, severally and jointly, can offer society more plausible
alternatives than those it now faces so distraughtly.
