The AMERICAN JOURNAL of
ECONOMICS and SOCIOLOGY
   Published QUARTERLY under grant from the Robert Schalkenbach
    Foundation in the interest of constructive synthesis in the social sciences.


VOLUME 20                    OCTOBER, 1961                           NUMBER 5

          The Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space
                             By MASON GAFFNEY

"Cotning events cast their shadows before."—TsioMAs CAMPBELL
ABSTRACT: This paper introduces the concept of "time-indivisibility,"
and suggests that it may interfere with optimal allocation of durable
resources, and especially permanent resources. Space on the earth's stir-
face is taken as a representative permanent resource. The limitations of
leasing and lending as time-dividers are briefly sketched. A simple tech-
nique is advanced for analyzing on an annual basis the effects of time-
indivisibility, and it is demonstrated that permanent goods do not tend
to be allocated in keeping with the equimarginal ideal. The technique
is further developed to analyze the effects on allocation of depreciation
and appreciation, the latter tending to aggravate and the former to
meliorate the diseconomies inherent in time-indivisibility.
                                         I
                                Time-indivisibility
IT IS A BASIC MAXIM of economic theory, and rather plain common sense
as well, that indivisibility of resources tends to interfere with their ideal
allocation. If Q is inseparable from P. those wanting Q alone must
settle for less of it, and more of P, than they would most prefer; and vice
versa. Accordingly, economists have tended to frown on rigid attachments
such as tie-in sales, appurtenances, all-or-nothing deals, full-line forcing,
bundles of rights, exclusive patronage contracts, and other artificial limita-
tions on free choice and the free flow of individual resources to their most
productive uses.
   This paper concerns a particular aspect of indivisibility: time-indivisibil-
ity. By "time-indivisibility" the writer means a tieing of the present to
466        The American Journal (if Economks and Sociology
the future such that he who would use a durable good cannot easily buy
its services from week to week or year to year as he needs them, the way
he buys his labor and raw materials, but must buy in one piece a claim
to its services over its full span of years.
   Time-indivisibility affects the allocation of durable goods in the measure
of their durability. It hardly affects how the market allocates goods that
endure only, say, two or three years. Its influence over durable goods
like buildings is more perceptible. It most affects the allocation of perma-
nent goods, of which the most evident example is space on the earth's
surface, or land, which in this study we will let represent the whole genus
of permanent goods, of which it constitutes a major part. He who buys
title to land can divide it down to a very small piece in two dimensions,
and dispense if he will with the third, both aerial and subterranean. But
the fourth dimension runs from now to doomsday. That is longer than
he is likely to need it, and costs more money, certainly, than many hard-
pressed entrepreneurs can conveniently raise at one time.
   To put it in conventional symbolic terms, the buyer of title to durable
goods must pay not just for the immediate annual income, a, but for that
plus a stream of future incomes (which he discounts at a rate 1):
                      a1    a2
                      1+1 (1+i) +...+ (i+i)
                                        a11
                   a0+—+                                                (1)
When he buys impermanent products, the anticipated annual incomes
decline with time and in a few years the series ends. But when he buys
land, the incomes are not in general expected to decline, and the series is
infinite. Where n equals inlinity and a and i are constant in perpetuity,
the series may be simplified, as is well known, to the form:
                                      a
                                  a+-,
                                    1
                                                                        (2)
the latter term being much the larger, and generally much larger than a
corresponding expression for a declining and finite series. This extended
time-dimension constitutes a costly appurtenance to the current services of
land.
   Let us see how time-indivisibility might interfere with optimal allocation
of permanent resources. Moving a step closer to reality, what one buys, of
course, is not a specified guaranteed annual income, a, but the use of land,
call it U, a potentiality from which the user may take various incomes de-
pending on how he uses it, and how external circumstances develop. Dif-
ferent persons attach different values to U, depending in general on how
productive they would make the land. In a perfect market, U would tend
                   Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                      467

to gravitate to holdings in which its marginal productivity would be a
maximum.
 Now time-indivisibility would constitute no problem if the highest bidder
for U could also bid the most, or even the same amount as others, for the
subsequent terms. But this is not in general the fact. Even assuming for
brevity's sake that all individuals' valuations of U remain constant in per-
petuity, there is another element, i, which varies among persons—a crucial
postulate, which will be defended—and affects what they are willing to pay
for land titles. Formally i represents the rate of interest at which the indi-
vidual discounts future values. More generally it may be taken, again for
brevity's sake, to subsume the individual's inclination to speculate and his
financial power to indulge it. It is this ability to carry interest burdens, as
much as the ability to make land productive, that determines who will bid
highest for land titles.
   Suppose, for example, the marginal productivity of certain lands would
be $20 a year in the enterprise of individual A, and twice that, $40 a year,
in the enterprise of individual B, both in perpetuity. But suppose A has
funds of his own to invest, whose best alternative yield he reckons at 2 per
 cent, while B can borrow only at 6 per cent. B, then, can bid no higher
than $40 plus !, or $707. B could not meet the top bid of A, which is
$20 plus!, or $1020.
   This is not to deny that B could realize an income from year to year on
his investment, a higher income than A could realize. And when his
need terminated, if we wish to assume that it would, he could sell the title
probably undepreciated, and often as not appreciated, in the same markets
open to A, perhaps to A himself. But this in no way disposes of the prob-
lem of time-indivisibility. For the problem is not that B would have to
throw money away on a "tie-in" that is entirely worthless to him. The
problem is rather that he would have to carry the burden of interest on
this investment over each year he held the title. And this he is less
well equipped than A to do, for exactly the same reason that he cannot meet
A's price for :—B must reckon a higher interest rate.
  Operationally this is probably the most convenient way to pose the prob-
lem, one which we will pursue from here on. The individual's annual mar-
ginal cost of holding land is interest on the price of the title. As different




                                                                                  j
individuals have access to funds at different rates of interest, the marginal
cost of holding the same lands varies from person to person (and, of course,
468           The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

from firm to firm). As each individual tends to equate marginal cost with
marginal productivity on his own holdings, the marginal productivity of
land comes to vary from holding to holding, contrary to the equimarginal
ideal. Time indivisibility deters many land-hungry individuals from buy-
ing at all. Others take some land, but less than if they could buy it a
month or a year at a time. Because they cannot divide it temporally, they
divide it spatially, lopping off much needed acres to fit their lands to the
Procrustean beds of their finances. On the other hand, financially power-
ful individuals and firms may extend their holdings without much concern
over productivity, current or future. These are the land-surfeited, holding
too much to let them earn a very good income from each unit.1
   Here, then, is a matter of some practical consequence. It is a problem
with which many economists have grappled when investigating markets for
land. Here, too, is a matter of important theoretical implications. But
thus far the investigators have had to proceed without benefit of the sharper
focus which theory might afford. To be sure several economists, working
from particulars of the land markets toward generalizations of theory, have
advanced promising suggestions. But little of their work has found its
way into that accumulating body of thought which the profession passes on
as 'the" basic principles of economics. This paper suggests that time-in-
divisibility might warrant such consideration. And it advances a simple
technique for integrating it into the structure of economic theory.
                                 II
            Leasing and Lending: Imperfect Time-dividers
THE CRITICAL READER may already have wondered whether our economy
does not already provide adequate time-dividing facilities in the institutions
of leasing and lending. Both, without question, are means for dividing up
the time-dimension of durable goods, and theorists who maintain, with Ely
and Wehrwein, that "Rent acts as the 'sorter' and 'arranger' of land uses"3
doubtless do so on the assumption that the time problem can be so disposed
    1 An important corollary problem is obviously that persons like B must, in order to
finance that much of U that they do take, sink more of their limited funds than they
would most prefer into claims to remote future values. This, of course, cuts into alter-
native investments they might make in, say, machinery and equipment. And persons like
A sink less of their funds into claims to remote future values than they would most prefer.
In the present brief paper we will not pursue this corollary problem.
    2 Some of these are the following: Philip Cornick, "Land Prices in a Commodity Price
System," Journal of Land and Public Utility Economics 10 (1934), pp. 217—31; Clyde R.
Chambers, "Farm Land Income and Farm Land Value," American Economic Review 14
 (1924), pp. 673—98; and David Weeks, "A Suggested Approach to the Farm Land Valua-
tion Problem," Berkeley, n.d. (typewritten ms. in the Giannini Library, Berkeley, Califor-
nia).
        R. '1'. Ely and G. S. Wehrwein, Land Economics, New York, Macmillan, 1940, p.
139.
                    Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                           469

of. It will be well to digress for a bit, therefore, to outline the reasons why
leasing and lending appear to be so imperfect and to entail costs so heavy
that the pressure of economic loss from time-indivisibility must mount high
before individuals can find any net advantage in relieving it by resort to
either.
   From a remote enough vantage, leasing and lending seem to promise
complete solutions. By leasing land, a user can buy its services a year or
less at a time, leaving to some absentee landlord the burden of financing
title. Or, by recourse to lending institutions, a land user can borrow the
wherewithal to finance title himself. Those who take leasing as a perfect
substitute for owner-operation may then write of land gravitating to the
individual in whose care it yields (and who will, therefore, pay) the
highest rent. Others who put their faith in lending may mention the "nor-
mal rate" or "the going rate of return" on investments, which by implica-
tion any investor can get at will and at which any would-be land user can
borrow.
  To inspect leasing and lending at all closely, however, is to see that both
are very imperfect arrangements. They are by no means entirely unwork-
able, and one must interpret "time-indivisibility" not as an absolute but as
short for "imperfect time-divisibility." But each involves costs so high
that the market must tolerate considerable deviation from ideal equimar-
gina! allocation of land among different owner-operated, self-financed hold-
ings, before resorting to either. That is, affluent A may extend his lands
until their marginal productivity becomes a good deal lower than it is on
the narrow holding of impecunious B without its becoming feasible for A
either to lease land to B, or lend him the money to buy it.
   Consider leasing. Sentimental preference for ownership over tenancy
seems to be the rule, and as all economic value originates in human prefer-
ence, this one is not to be despised. But the more tangible drawbacks are
more serious. Leasing, as compared with owner-operation, intrudes into
management an operationally superfluous human relationship, involving
extra costs that detract from the net produce of the land, and discords and
conflicts of interest that tend to preclude full development. The mere cost
of collecting rent, for example, often consumes an appreciable part of it,
especially where rent is low. Where collection difficulties warrant it, land-
lords often resort to sharecropping, or some urban equivalent, arrange-
ments destructive of much incentive. More important, short-term lessees
have no interest in the future of the assets they work and manage, and will
    J. G. Sutherland and C. E. Bishop, Increasing Production and Incomes, N.C.A.E.S.
Tech. Bul. No. 117, 1955, p. 6; Theodore Morgan, Introduction to Economics, 2d ed.,
Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall, 19 6, p. 356.
470          The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

hardly give them an owner's care. They cannot rationally attach long-term
improvements to land they may lose at any lease-end, nor can they sacrifice
any present values to conserve future values either in the soil or in improve-
ments the landlord provides. They cannot plan ahead, but only from lease
to lease, although efficient land use requires long-range planning. In all
their plans they must build in flexibility, at some cost, for the contingency
of eviction. All this is well enough established, especially among students
of land tenure, that we need not dwell on it.
   To obviate part of these extra costs, landlords sometimes grant long-term
leases, but not as a general rule. There appear to be compelling reasons for
this. Should economic rent rise above contract rent, the landlord would
receive none of the increase; while should it fall below, the tenant might
very likely fail to pay. Too, the landlord who abdicates his power to evict
cannot protect himself against tenant practices exploitive of the soil or of the
landlord's improvements; nor is he free to seize the opportunity to sell at
the most opportune moment.6 For these and for other reasons, long-term
leases are rare, and short ones, with all their disadvantages, the general rule.
   Leasing, therefore, is a poor substitute for landownership. As a time-
divider it leaves much to be desired. Most of the telling points of those
who advocate tenancy as a social norm seem to be variations on the theme
that it is a time-divider.7 But other than that, there is little to commend it.
There are good reasons why land users strongly prefer to couple occupa-
tion with ownership.
   Next, consider lending. This lacks the major drawbacks of leasing and,
like leasing, contributes something toward solving the problem of time-
indivisibility. It might go far toward solving it satisfactorily were the
     For example, see the following Interregional Land Tenure Research Committee,
Agricultural Land Tenure Research, Chicago, Farm Foundation, 1955, pp. 11—14. J. A.
Baker, "Tenure Status and Land Use Patterns in the Corn Belt," Bureau of Agricultural
Economics Land Economics Report No. 5, 1939 (mimeographed) Hoyle Southern, "Land
Tenure and Soil Conservation," in H. Hoffsomer, ed., The Social and Economic Significance
of Land Tenure in the Southwestern States, pp. 200—24, Chapel Hill, University of North
Carolina Press, 1950, pp. 216—7; Peter Nelson, "Land Tenure and Agricultural Conserva-
tion, Current Farm Economics, Vol. 2, No. 2, Stillwater, Oklahoma Agricultural Experi-
ment Station, April, 1938; Rainer Schikele, et al., Economic Phases of Erosion Control in
Northern Iowa and Southern Minnesota, Iowa Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin
No. 333, June, 1935.
    8 A persistent tendency grossly to overestimate the possibilities of future resale at ad-
vanced prices has been noted by the British Uthwatt Committee. (Expert Committee on
Compensation and Betterment, Final Report, [The Uthwart Reporti, [Csnd. 6386],
 (1942) paragraphs 23, 24. Cited in G. L. S. Shackle, Expectations in Economics, Cam-
bridge, the University Press, 1949, pp. 91—3.) The authors write of the "floating value"
of land in and around urban areas, which they estimate in the aggregate to exceed by many
times the values that the city can support.
      The most widely cited example seems to be T. W. Schultz, "Capital Rationing, Un-
certainty, and Farm-Tenancy Reform," Journal of Political Economy, 48 (1940), pp.
309—24.
                    Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                          471

money markets able to establish one universal market interest rate, that
"going rate of return" of ancient legend, at which all lenders might lend
and any borrower freely borrow any sum for any term. But, of course, the
markets achieve no such thing. The economic worlds of borrowers and
lenders remain well insulated by the high cost of transferring funds.
Keynes called the barrier "lenders' risk," and he incorporated the concept
most explicitly in his theories as a floor under interest rates.8 Hart and others
have added "credit rationing" as a barrier to lending; and, from the bor-
rowers' side, "linkage of risks" and the need to maintain "financial re-
spectability" as deterrents to borrowing.° If these barriers affect the ag-
gregates, how much more so the components.
  Like resistors in an electrical circuit, these "lending costs," if one may
lump them in that phrase, repel part of the flow. And the funds that do
trickle through the resistance lose much of their "charge," their economic
potential. Between affluent A, who deposits surplus funds in the bank for
2 per cent, and impecunious B, who borrows from it at 6 per cent, there re-
mains a wide barrier. B, borrowing limited amounts at high rates on short
terms without guarantee of renewal, and only for specified conservative
projects approved by the banker and the several regulating, insuring, and
endorsing agencies who peer over the banker's shoulder, does not by bor-
rowing acquire the full financial potential of A. When it comes to bid-
ding for land titles, A and B live, although they may be neighbors, in two
different economies.
   Further, among B and C, D, E, and F, each of whom borrows at a dif-
ferent interest rate in different amounts for different periods and under dif-
ferent limitations, there is a series of barriers. And between them and
those many others who cannot borrow at all on any terms, the insulation is
impenetrable.
   Were differences in interest rates and other conditions of loans based
solely on lenders' well-founded judgments of the relative probabilities of
individual borrowers' producing from loan-financed land the incomes they
anticipate, there would still be reasons for denying that lending adequately
solved the problem of time-indivisibility. But there is no need to pursue
the implications of conditions contrary to fact. The conventional basis of
lending is set forth clearly by Schikele:
   The principle of allocation is collateral security, not marginal productiv-
ity. . - . These two principles tend to work at cross purposes: with increas-
   8J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Emj,loyment, Interest, and Money, New York,
Harcourt, Brace, 1936, pp. 144, 208.
     £ G. Hart, Money, Debt, and Economic Activity, New York, Prentice-Hall, 1948,
pp. 202—3.
472          The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

ing collateral security, the marginal productivity of capital tends to decline,
and vice versa. Instead of allocating capital to where it is scarce, our credit
system allocates it to places where it is ample.'°
Liquid assets do not seem to lap along the horizontal contour of an isopro-
ductivity shoreline, enveloping headlands and promontories, penetrating
bays and inlets, seeking a universal level in the impartial way envisaged in
some of the more hydraulic passages of economic literature. Liquid assets
often flow uphill; they tend to gravitate towards established nuclei. Not
only does the market not allocate funds in the most economical way, but it
allocates them in an especially pernicious way, such as to aggravate and,
perhaps more than any other factor, to initiate and perpetuate the concen-
tration of economic power.1'
   Lenders do not, of course, completely ignore marginal productivity. If
they did the economic machine might not carry us through the month. But
certainly they do not accord it the steady primacy that would be necessary
to let economists take comfort in the thought that lenders effectively deter-
mine who can afford to take and hold title to much of our land.
                                  III
                How Time-indivisibility Affects Allocation
IT IS OF SOME THEORETICAL INTEREST and practical consequence, therefore,
to set out precisely the factors that determine the allocation of space and
other durable goods among different holdings in a world, such as ours,
where interest rates vary widely among individuals, and leasing so dulls the
edge of husbandry as not to become a feasible alternative to owner-opera-
tion until the marginal productivities of land on different owner-operated
holdings have come to diverge widely.
   To begin simply, suppose that land prices are expected to remain con-
stant; that leasing is too costly to consider at all; that there are no taxes of
any kind; and that the costs of transferring land are negligible. Then
each individual will extend his landholdings until the last unit just yields
him his interest rate—that is, until its annual marginal product divided by
its price equals his interest rate. Algebraically, let R be the revenue prod-
uct, L the unit of land, P the price per unit of land, and i the individual's
rate. Then each individual expands his holdings until:


                                                                                            (3)
    10 Rainer Schikele, "Farm Tenure Under the Strain of War," Journal of Farm Econom-
ics, 25 (Proceedings) (1943), pp. 235—44, p. 240.
    1i This does not necessarily imply that it is possible or desirable to abolish collateral re-
quirements. Policy proposals, of which credit reform is only one of many, are beyond
the scope of this paper.
                   Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                     473

For the annual marginal cost of holding land is its price times the in-
dividual's interest rate (P1); and the individual expands his use of this,
as of all resources, until its marginal revenue product equals its marginal
cost:
                                 dR =


                                             ,
                                        Pi                             (3a)
                                             dR
Figure 1 illustrates the point. MRP, or           represents the annual mar-




                                   LAND

                              Figure 1
Marginal revenue productivity of land added to fixed complements; and
        annual marginal cost of land, at 2 per cent and 6 per cent
ginal revenue product of land added to a fixed complement of men and
capital. The horizontal broken curves represent the annual cost per unit
(P1) at 2 per cent and 6 per cent. Messrs. 2 Per Cent and 6 Per Cent pay
the same price for title to each unit of land but very different prices for
the annual use of land, due to the difference of their interest rates. Mr.
2 Per Cent, therefore, will combine a good deal of land with each unit
of labor and equipment, lavishing it down to low marginal returns. Mr. 6
Per Cent will economize on land much more stringently, adding it only
until the last unit yields him $6 for each $100 of land price.
   Figure 1 has wider bearing than its simplifying and limiting assump-
tions might suggest. In practice Mr. 2 Per Cent's marginal revenue pro-
ductivity curve will not look just like Mr. 6 Per Cent's. But of course the
point is that no matter what the entire curves look like, the marginal re-
turns to land will differ on their two holdings. Again, of course, neither
 474        The' American lournal of Economics and Sociology

 is limited to a fixed complement of men and equipment, but either man
 can increase them to delay the advent of decreasing returns to additional
 land. But whatever complement of men and equipment an individual
 finally musters, he will ultimately encounter some kind of diminishing
 returns, and he will then increase his landholdings until the last unit
 just yields him his interest rate. And a third elementary point: the know-
 ing marginalist need hardly be reminded that Mr. 2 Per Cent tends to
 spread complementary labor and equipment equally thin over his entire
 holdings. He tends to work each unit of his lands, and not just, the last
 acquired, in such a way that its marginal productivity is $2 per $100.
   Some important results follow immediately. Current doctrine evidently
 misses the mark. The rent of land, or, if you prefer, its marginal pro-
 ductivity, does not "sort and arrange" the pattern of land use. This is
 not to say that it should not. Economists of past and present have
 demonstrated convincingly that would be ideal. But it does not. Many
 different land economies exist side by side. One extreme is prodigal of
 land as of culls from a local mill; the other is precious of land as of rare
 treasure from Cathay. Actual land use deviates enormously from the
 equimarginal ideal. Even assuming, as so far we have done, that no one
 holds land for the rise of price, its marginal revenue productivities on
 adjacent holdings may diverge as much as the interest rates reckoned by
 different individuals.
    These deviations are not just exotics, to be explained ad hoc in each
 situation and expected to work out ideally "in the long run" or under
 "normal" conditions. No word has been breathed of "speculators,"
 scape-goats of many a mono-diabolistic interpretation. Nor is Mr. 2 Per
 Cent sacrificing present values to conserve more valuable future ones—we
 assumed yields constant in perpetuity and discovered that Mr. 2 Per Cent
 would use land less productively in perpetuity. Here, rather, is a perma-
 nent underlying tendency, a tendency as permanent as the indivisibility of
  U, the current use of land, from U/i, a claim to future use of land in
  perpetuity. As long as individuals differ in power to finance claims on
  the future (which is likely as long as individuals differ at all), there is no
  reason to expect ideal allocation of U alone. Mr. 2 Per Cent holds land
  for an annual cost much lower than its social cost, its best alternative use.
  For Mr. 6 Per Cent, who could earn $6 from land that yields only $2 to
  Mr. 2 Per Cent, has no way of making Mr. 2 Per Cent feel this social cost
  as his individual cost, either directly or as foregone gain. To Mr. 2 Per
• Cent the annual cost is $2 per $100, and that is all. Mr. 6 Per Cent's high
  productivity is no concern of his.
                      Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                               475

                                           Iv
                            Appreciation and Depreciation
WE INFERRED those results simply from incorporating time into the
analysis. We postulated no changes through time. But when land buyers
expect changes—and in this world of ebb and flow they usually do—
practice may depart even further from the equimarginal ideal. Let us
cease assuming, now, that buyers expect land prices to hold steady, and
explore the changes which the prospect of change brings. This is perhaps
the most interesting and rewarding aspect of the study.
   Suppose, now, buyers expect the value of U to rise, or i to fall, and
hence P, the price of land, to rise. "Values may be created by the mere
expectancy of some new use . •" likewise of lower capitalization rates,
and part of this hope materializes immediately in higher prices for land
titles. But not all the hope so manifests itself, because some time lies
between now and its realization. Part of it appears instead as expectations
of annual increments to land prices. Higher present prices are only the
embryo of expectation, which takes on more and more substance until the
moment of birth.
   Now the individual faces a more complex decision. We can formulate
it simply, however, by compressing its elements to an annual basis. This
device is handy for him in practice as for us in theory, which augurs
well for its realism, since no economizing technique, however valid, is
likely to find much use unless easily rendered in the common tongue.
   The individual who expects land prices to rise still higher will now
consider that increase an additional gain, on top of the annual marginal
product, to be had by holding land. To the individual, the annual price
increment becomes part of the annual "yield" of land.13 He may regard
this aggressively as an increase in the price he can demand of someone
else; or defensively as an increase in what someone else might demand of
him: he responds much the same to either feeling. Each individual now
adds land to his holdings until the last unit thus "yields" him his interest
rate: until the marginal product plus the price increment, each divided by
   12 H. M. Lewis, W. D. Heydecker, and R. A. O'Hara, Land Values, Distribution
VIlthin the New York Region and Relation to Various Factors in Urban Growth, Engi-
neering Series, Monograph No. 3, Regional Plan of New York and Its Environs, New York,
I927, p. 31.
   13 We probably understate the case a good deal by assuming that all parties have equal-
valued expectations of annual price increments. Financially less powerful individuals, it
seems plausible, would not always be able to attach as much weight to given price incre-
ments as would the more powerful, especially if they must commit land to heavy improve-
ments whose presence tends to preclude quick resale. The possibility of resale in a remote
and doubtful future may for some of them have very little meaning. Unfortunately we
cunnot here pursue this thread.
 476       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

 the price, equals his interest rate. Symbolically, until:
                                dR
                                       -i
                                       P-                              (4)
 This equation epitomizes the whole study. Let us christen it the "dynamic
 equilibrium equation." It is an instrument of many uses and implications,
 which we can only begin to explore here.
     It does not follow that all individuals will extend their holdings, an
  obvious impossibility. The annual increment that buyers anticipate en-
- courages every one to buy more land; but higher land prices, the other
  manifestation of their higher expectations, discourage it. But it does
  not follow, either, that these two new forces will just offset one another
  in the reckoning of each individual, so that no one will change his hold-
 ings. For while the annual increment encourages each in the same measure
 (assuming, for simplicity, that each anticipates the same increment), the
 higher price of land titles discourages each buyer in a different measure,
 in proportion to his interest rate. The net result is that high-interest
 individuals must contract their already skimpy holdings, some no doubt
 below the limit of viability, while low-interest individuals may extend
 theirs.
    Those who pay or impute low interest rates buy more land because the
 expected annual price increment exceeds the increase of their interest
 burden. Those who reckon high interest rates must contract because the
 increase of their interest burden exceeds the expected annual price in-
 crement. There is of course some intermediate interest rate, call it j,
 those reckoning which need neither expand nor contract. j equals the
 expected annual price increment divided by the price increment that has
 already materialized. Symbolically,
                                 J=nAPn0                               (5)
 where /P is the expected annual increment to land price; P0 is the price
 that would prevail if buyers expected a and i to hold steady; and P1 is
 the present price. This value for J derives from observing that the added
 incentive to hold land is AP, and the added cost is (P1 —P0) i. When
 the added incentive just equals the added cost, the basic equation still
 holds true, with no change in the marginal revenue productivity of land
          This is when:
 (dL)
                            AP= (P1—P0) i, or                         (5a)
                                   AP
                                1=P1—PoJ                               (5)
                         Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                 477

j is the dividing line between lower interest rates that allow those reckoning
them to expand, and higher rates that force those reckoning them to
contract.
  Returning to Messrs. 2 Per Cent and 6 Per Cent for a numerical ex-
ample, suppose they expect annual price increments of 2 per cent, and
suppose land prices have doubled. Mr. 6 Per Cent's marginal revenue
product, formerly 6 per cent of the price of land, is now become only
3 per cent of it, too little to justify his holding so much. To this 3 per
cent he adds the expected 2 per cent price increment, but still lacks some-
thing of justifying his investment. He must therefore contract until his
marginal productivity equals 4 per cent of the present price, or 8 per cenV
of the original price.
  Now Mr. 2 Per Cent, on the other hand, finds the annual increment of
2 per cent adequate to warrant his holding land yielding him no marginal
revenue product whatever. He will expand until the marginal revenue
productivity of land to him equals zero. This may take the form of
spreading his men and equipment very thin over a wide area, or of holding
land completely out of use. One need not search far for examples of
both practices.
  The only persons whom these new expectations leave unmoved are the
Messrs. 4 Per Cent, whose interest rate is the j of this example ($4/$100
equals 4 per cent). For them the expected price increment of 2 per cent,
or $4, just offsets the extra interest on the title. All those with lower
interest rates expand; all with greater ones contract.
  In result, the marginal productivities of land on different holdings
come to differ in greater proportion than individuals' interest rates. As
between Messrs. 2 Per Cent, 4 Per Cent and 6 Per Cent, their interest
rates are as 1 :2:3, but the marginal productivities of land on their different
holdings are as 0:2:4.
  On the other hand, when buyers expect land to depreciate, marginal
productivities of land in different holdings tend to converge with one
another. For then interest, the cost that varies most markedly among
individuals, ceases to be the only annual cost of holding land. It is joined
by depreciation, a cost which interest rates do not determine and which
tends, therefore, to afflict all landholders the same. Interest cost loses
absolute as well as relative weight. For not only may "Values . . . be
created by the mere expectancy of some new use . . . (but) they may
depreciate as a result of failure of expectations."14 When buyers foresee
lower land prices, present prices become somewhat lower, too; and price,
of course, is the base on which interest cost is reckoned.
   14
        Lewis, et a!,, bc cit.
478        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

   In terms of the dynamic equilibrium equation (4), let buyers expect
land prices (P) to fall, and the annual price increment (LP) becomes
negative. To gather all costs together on the right side, multiply both
sides by P, and subtract /P from both. The equation becomes:

                                                                           (4a)
To obviate any confusion in algebraic signs, take the absolute value of
LP, which here is negative, and write the equation:

                               =Pi+PJ                                      (4b)
(This form applies only to depreciating assets). Each individual now adds

land to his holdings until its marginal revenue productivity (dL) equals
interest cost plus depreciation. Depreciation has shouldered its way next
to interest to stand as a major annual cost and share its previously ex-
clusive control over marginal revenue productivity. Interest loses in-
fluence also because the prospect of depreciation has eroded off part of
its base, P.
   Reverting to the numerical example of Messrs. 2 Per Cent, 4 Per Cent,
and 6 Per Cent, suppose they expect land price to depreciate by $2 this
year, and suppose its price has already dropped to $50. A few simple
computations establish that they will adjust their holdings until their
respective marginal productivities stand in the proportion 1 '/2:2:2 '/2,
closer than their interest rates.
   It is an exceptional period, to be sure, when people expect land prices
to depreciate. This second form of the dynamic equilibrium equation has
its uses, however. Almost all durable assets other than land do depre-
ciate (and/or obsolesce and/or turn over, which for brevity may be in-
cluded with depreciation). The equation applies as well to them—let
us follow the classical terminology and call them 'capital"—as to de-
preciating lands.
   The equation, so applied, establishes what intuition suggests, that
time-indivisibility little perverts the allocation of mortal capital. Most
capital loses value rapidly with time, much more so than in the numerical
example just cited, so its annual depreciation exceeds its annual interest
cost by a good deal. Indeed many, probably most, economists have come
to doubt that businessmen let interest rates influence their decisions to

   '
 invest in any but the most durable goods.5
      M. Moonitz, "The Risk of Obsolescence and the Importance of the Rate of Interest,"
Journal of Political Economy, 51 (1943), pp. 349—55; F. £ Lutz, "The Interest Rate and
                      Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space                               479

  It is, rather, immortal land, and especially appreciating land, whose
allocation time-indivisibility seriously perverts from the equimarginal
ideal. With the dynamic equilibrium equation one may contrast the alloca-
tion of appreciating land with depreciating capital, simply by adjusting P
(up for land, down for capital), and changing the sign of AP. De-
preciation, added to an interest cost which its prospect has reduced, so
dilutes it that large differences among individual's interest rates affect
allocation only a little; appreciation, subtracted from an interest cost which
its prospect has magnified, so fortifies it that small differences among
individuals' interest rates affect allocation a great deal.
V. Conclusion
  Ideas come crowding to mind for qualifying, as well as applying the
dynamic equilibrium equation. Like other abstractions it sacrifices some-
thing of reality for clarity and generality; to apply it one must reconstitute
it with ingredients from the particular environment, which would pollute
such crystalline simplicity and symmetry as it may have with the murkier
qualities of the world we live in. This would be all to the good, but is
beyond the scope of a few pages. Here we must leave it, with a brief
appraisal.
  The equation as developed thus far is limited by several assumptions:
no taxes; prohibitive leasing costs; negligible transfer costs; identical and
certain expectations; permanence of land; and others unspecified. This
adds up to rather a lavish use of the ceteris paribus prerogative, and in
application these must all be relaxed. In doing so one would discover,
not that the equation dissolved, but that it proved a useful instrument
affording insights, respectively, into tax policy, land tenure, real estate
markets, forecasting and uncertainty, and conservation, as well as subjects
such as business cycles and imperfect competition for which its present
form may be adequately adapted. Thus the equation might serve as a
vehicle for re-integrating land economics into the broadening mainstream
of developing economic theory from which, since Ricardo, it has tended
more and more to flow apart.
   To be sure, even with the assumptions relaxed, the equation cannot

Investment in a Dynamic Economy," American Economic Review, 35 (194 ), pp. 811—30;
H. D. Henderson, "The Significance of the Rate of Interest," Oxford Economic Papers,
No. 1, October, 1938, p. 9; H. C. Wallich, "The Changing Significance of the Interest
Rate," American Economic Review, 36 (1946), pp. 761—87; J. E. Meade and P. W. S.
Andrews, "Summary of Replies to Questions on Effect of Interest Rates," Oxford Eco-
nomic Pafrers, No. 1, October, 1938, pp. 14—31; J. F. Ebersole, "The Influence of Interest
Rates upon Entrepreneurial Decision, in Business," Harvard Business Review, 17 (1938),
pp. 35—39. A recent contrary view is expressed in H. W. White, "Interest Inelasticity of
Investment Demand," American Economic Review, 46 (1956). pp. 565—87.
4o        The Americdn Journal of Economics iind Sociology

presume to substitute for mature understanding of all that lies behind
it. In compressing all factors to an annual basis it submerges some of the
finer points. For example, it subsumes all differences in the terms of
lending, in prospects for refinancing, all budgetary restraints of any sort,
in the single symbol i. And it subsumes all prospects for future improved
incomes, or resale at whatever date, in the single symbol P. Such short-
hand notation can convey its full meaning only to those knowing some-
thing of the complexities it represents—and only to them if they are
willing to translate their knowledge into its terms.
  But brevity is also a virtue. The equation brings data quickly to focus
in a workable form which it is hoped the layman may understand and
the specialist find operable. Simplicity lends it a kind of realism that
more comprehensive alternative formulations may lack, since probably
many landholders actually think in its terms. And its compactness has
let us in a few pages reduce to some order a complex tangle of relationships
and reach an important substantive conclusion.
  Let us review the conclusion. Time-indivisibility deflects from the
equimarginal ideal the allocation of durable goods in proportion to their
durability: capital, by and large, only a little; stable-priced land more;
and appreciating land very seriously. In the bidding for appreciating
lands marginal productivity recedes to a secondary role, and yields place
to financial power as the prime allocating agent, the "sorter and arranger"
of land use. Nothing could be more wrong than the often expressed

be stimulated by the prospect of a rise in its          ;'°
idea that "Careful maintenance and administration of land are likely to
                                                             That prospect
even leads financially powerful firms and individuals to hold lands yielding
them no income at all.
  This conclusion suggests a different emphasis on land in the thinking
of economists, many of whom have tended to assess its importance by its
imputed income. This income, shrouded as it is in "entrepreneurial
withdrawals" and wreathed in "profits," has not made a very tangible
object for study. But the importance of land to economic theory, and to
social welfare, may lie not so much in this unknown figure as in the latent
income unrealized from lands that the "sorter and arranger" withholds
from their most productive uses; and from the unemployed and under-
employed labor and capital these lands might complement. It may lie,
too, in the distribution of land: the conclusion suggests that land may be,
contrary to a widespread impression, near the focus of the concentration
of economic power.
     Shorey Peterson, Economics, Rev. Ed., New York, Henry Holt, 1954, p. 674.
                         Unwieldy Time-Dimension of Space              481

   In another era men reproached the "dead hand of the past" for keeping
land from best use. They had good cause. But is not the unborn hand
of the future more to blame? Coming events cast their shadows before
to become substance in the prices of land titles. These are anachronisms
too, anachronisms out of tomorrow. They ill suffice the needs of the day.
University of Missouri




               Rural Development in the United States
"I AM FIRM in my belief that in the future years the Rural Development
Program will take its place as one of the most beneficial and important
programs of your administration." This prophecy was made by the U. S.
Secretary of Agriculture in a letter to the President in 1960 transmitting
the Fifth Annual Report of the Rural Development Program.
   The 24-page report is enhanced by an excellent selection of photographs
which tell in a brief but vivid way the story of five years of progress under
the national Rural Development Program.
   The opening paragraph of the report sets the theme for the pages which
follow. It says, "In spite of many difficult obstacles, the Rural Develop-
ment Program has consistently beet enlarged and made more effective year
by year since it was announced in 1955."
   "In 1956," the report points out, "less than twenty-five counties in only
a handful of states had begun formal programs. Today, some 210 counties
in all major sections of the nation have the work underway or in the plan-
fling stage."
   The report then reviews what has been done in farm production and
marketing, forestry and conservation, industrial improvement, youth, health
services, and community clubs. Another section of the report gives an
account of contributions and activities of various groups and agencies, fed-
eral, state, local, and private. A full-page map shows where the program
is in operation and the report concludes with a list of Rural Development
Program counties and areas as of July 1960.
                                                      MILTON MANGUM
USDA,
Washington, D. C.
