               The Benefits of Farm Programs:*
                Incidence, Shifting, and Dissipation
                            By MAsoN WnNEY
                                        I
                                  Introduction
I WRiTE AS ONE who has spent half his career inside and half outside agri-
cultural economics. That makes me less familiar than many agricultural
economists with the details of farm programs, and this will be the kind of
treatment where you cannot see the trees for the forest. What I had in
mind when I undertook this inquiry into farm programs is that, like a man
from Mars, I may be able to contribute something useful with an outsider's
perspective. At the same time, as a land economist who has studied the
southward movement of subsidized California water to irrigate subsidized
cotton developed by subsidized research to replace eastern lands idled by
public expenditures, I have some feel for the tensions and contradictions of
that set of random programs, agencies, and appropriations which we laugh-
ingly refer to as a farm policy.
   But I do not wish to scold agriculture for outstanding iniquity. As farm
spokesmen have always argued, other industries are worse. Restrictive
farm programs do not yet match the production allowable prorate of major
oil-producing states which let wells produce something like seven days
out of each month. The numbers of farm firms have never fallen so low as
auto-manufacturing firms. And farmers have never conspired so easily in
restraint of trade as Main Street merchants in the typical county seat. I
never cared for the implied philosophy that Billy may cheat because Johnny
started it: we try to teach our children better. But I do not question that
Johnny started it.
   I do wish to argue that the farmer's "countervailing power" in which we
put our faith is exercised for the benefit of a minority in agriculture; that
inter-industry equity is a meaningless idea, and our efforts to achieve it are
purchased at the cost of greater inequity inside agriculture, and of unac-
ceptable social cost greater than any benefits; and that even the benefits may
be transitory.
                                        U
                       The Proximate Incidence of Gains
THE flOXThfAfl BENEFICIARY of most farm programs is the landowner
   'A paper ddivered at the annual meetings of the American Farm Economics Maccia-
don, Stillwater, Oklahoma, August, 1965.
238         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

per se. Farmers who are not landowners, like the migrant harvesters who
get down to 25 cents an hour in some places, do not gain, but suffer from
lower demand for their srevices. Landowners who are not farmers, such
as the matinee idols, senators, industrial executives, and country bankers
who sink their spare change in rural real estate, benefit greatly. In the
short run some tenants with long leases, or rthewable ones under custom-
bound crop shares, may gain a good deal. But these tenants really have a
species of equity in land, and it hardly rises above the dignity of a quibble
to cite them to refute what is otherwise too obvious for serious question.1
   Agricultural economists are becoming increasingly vocal on this subject
which, as farm land values continue to soar in defiance of falling "farm"
income, is increasingly apparent. The work inspired by Walter Chryst is
outstanding.2
   His findings really should not surprise us. The surprise is why it took
the profession so long to catch up with David Ricardo. In analyzing the
corn laws—the farm price supports of his day—he made the same point,
and on the side enunciated the law of rent and founded classical economics.
   Ricardo must be qualified, some say completely rejected. It is true that
the increase of rent in one industry is limited because in the long run we
can increase the land supply. But we do so only at progressively higher
cost. That is why the low-cost lands yield rent—which, after all, is about
what Ricardo said.
   Others point out that, if landlords gain from higher prices, they also are
the ones who have to withdraw a resource from production. True enough
.—but they get paid for it. Here is where the farm landowner has it over
the members of privately financed cartels. The oil man idles his well at his
own expense. The farm landowner gets paid for idling land, and he has
the choice of banking land or not, as his personal circumstances dictate. No
wonder the other cartels complain—they should be jealous.
   It is precisely the fact that land is selected as the input to be idled that
makes the "f arm" programs really landowners' programs. If we idld
labor, labor would become artificially scarce. Likewise, if we sought to re-
strict output by limiting the input of barns, hay balers, or peach trees, we
would make them scarce and put them in position to capture the benefits of
    'A few programs may give quotas to tenants rather than landowners. Such a quota,
if permanent, is a new kind of property which would stand to capture the benefits of farm
programs.
   2Por example, It. P. Boxlcy, Jr., and V. L. Gibson, Jr., Peanut Acreage Allotment
and Farm Land Values, Va. A.E.S., T.B. 175, 1964; F. a Maler, J. L Hedrick and V. I..
Gibson, Jr., The Sale Value of Flue-cured Tobacco Allotments, Va. A.ES., T.B. 14S
1960; J. L. Hedrick, "The Effects of the Price-support Program for Peanuts on the Sale
Value of Farms," Journal of Farm Economics, Vol. 44(5), December, 1962.
                       Benefits of Farm Programs                        239

price supports and technical progress. If we idled some of all inputs in
farm industry, we might properly call it a "farm program." But we single
out one input, land. One result, as everyone knows, has been to weaken
production control so much that one is tempted to wonder if that ever
was the prime objective. The greater effect has been to change the relative
bargaining power of different inputs inside agriculture vis-â-vis one another
and shift the terms of trade to favor land.
   As among landowners, the programs also have a systematic bias in favor
of larger ones. Larger landowners can spare marginal acres easier than
smaller ones. Their factor-mix is already lean on labor and machines rela-
tive to land—we usually perceive that as lower costs per aEre. Smaller
farmers, below optimum acreage, are by definition in the stage of increasing
returns to land, with marginal value greater than average. Those programs
that cut back everyone by a fixed per cent of his land are therefore harder
on smaller landowners whose marginal acres mean more to them.
   The bias is only slightly offset by exempting minuscule farms from cut-
backs in some commodity programs: these are charity cases. There may be
a greater offset in basing quotas on histories of production rather than
owned acres, because smaller landowners have tended, more than large
ones, to push their land to its capacity and grow intensive crops where they
could. But negating that is the fact that larger landowners tend to hold
the best land, of which a larger share would under an opHmal program have
historically been devoted to supported products.
   The commodities enjoying strongest support are on the whole land-using:
cash grain, wheat, rice, and cotton are prime examples. The littler fellows
who feed the grain to fatten hogs and cattle are not quite so well treatçd,
nor are those who grow their own. The argument that they are protected by
limiting feed grains hardly bears examination, and the quixotic behavior of
the National Farmers Organization would suggest a membership frustrated
to the point of irrationality.
   The pinch of land-idling on the interfactor terms of trade is accentuated
today when various pressures to substitute capital for labor have tended to
increase the optimum landholding. At a time when pressure to expand has
not yet worked itself out by consolidation and cannibalization of weaker
farms, most farms are in the stage of increasing returns to land, with the
marginal value of land greater than the average. In that context, programs
that cut back on land put on it an even greater premium than under static
conditions.
   Now at the same time we are thus manipulating factor proportions and
terms of interfactor bargaining, another set of farm programs seem calu-
                                                                                    I
240        The American Journd of Economics and Sociology

lated to inure to the benefit of farm landowners in another way. These are
programs of public works that bring to land water, or cheap power, or flood
control, or improved access, or what have you. Here I am using "farm pro-
gram" broadly—these are not operations of the Commodity Credit Corpo-
ration. They are, however, very much a part of the total bundle for agri-
culture secured in the political process—the Great American system of
public works for private profit. They are sponsored by organized farm
groups, and it is this larger picture with which this paper is concerned.
   Let us, without pretending to comprehensiveness, remind ourselves of
the richness and variety of these programs by enumerating several.
  The federal reclamation program is most often cited. In one way it
represents the genus poorly, because of the so-called "anti-speculation"
provisions which purport, with varying success, to ration the conversion of
public investment into private land values to a maximum 320 acres per
family. But small, medium, or large, it is still obviously a program to in-
crease land value and may reasonably be taken as the prototype of public
works programs. Other water supply agencies, notably the Army Engi-
neers, make no bones at all about their work enhancing private farm land
value for the benefit of a few.
   In multipurpose projects, by whatever agency, farm landowners usually
receive benefits of price discrimination, getting power or water at much
lower rates than city consumers. In federal redamation projects, which do
ask farms to help repay some costs, the irrigation component gets interest-
free money.
   But while reclamation is the most conspicuous of the expansive genus of
"farm programs," it is not, I think, the most pervasive. That distinction
belongs to the way we handle the layout and financing of distributive net-
works generally—that is, our utility and transportation lines.
  Most distributive networks consist of a rich, densely peopled center
grading off toward the fringes into marginal territory that barely repays the
cost of service, and submarginal territory that is carried by the surplus.
yielding center: perhaps promotionally, looking to a better future, but
often unwillingly by force of state law. It is almost universal practice that
charges throughout this network are either uniform—the postage-stamp
pricing principle—or insufficiently differentiated to reflect differential costs.
The charges may be rates, with private utilities or carriers, or taxes, with
public roads.
  The proximate beneficiaries of submarginal extensions are dearly those
whose lands they serve. The benefit is not universally diffused, but local-
ized within the ring served by submarginal extensions. To enjoy the
                        Benefits of Farm Programs                         241

benefit, one must locate where it is to be had, and of course pay the price in
rent or land value.
  We can all supply examples—the only problem is where to stop. Local
rural roads are everywhere costlier than farmers would or could pay for
themselves, and state financing means tapping the urban tax base for rural
works. Small feeder airlines serving rural areas require and get heavy
subsidies. Sparsely populated western states have many more miles per
capita of federally financed highways than do urban eastern states, reflecting
what the Indiana senator, Albert Beveridge, once styled "the free coinage
of western senators." The Rural Electrification Administration funnels
cheap credit to distribute farm power. Rural Free Delivery carries the mails
to whereever a farmer may choose to locate. Western irrigation districts
carry water up hills and over dales without surcharge at the end of the line.
And so on.
   Common carriers' freight rate structures generally discriminate against
high-value cargo, to give lower rates to bulk cargo, and farm landowners
gain preference from that because farm products generally fall in the bulky
low-rate classes.
   Then there are the ACP programs which help the farm landowner build
up the value of his property: establishing cover, liming, controlling erosion
by tillage, strip cropping, and contouring. There are water conservation
works—some doubling as farm swimming pools—built with the help of
the Soil Conservation Service and other agencies.
   We also try to spread credit around rural areas at lower interest rates than
would obtain in the absence of the Federal Land Bank, the Production
Credit Administration, the Farm Home Administration, etc. Short and
intermediate credit, used for production, tends to increase the annual value
of land. Long-term credit, used to buy land itself, tends to lower capitaliza-
tion rates and increase the land value derived from any level or annual
values. There was once some thought that rural credit programs might
work to offset the bias, in private lending, of credit rationing based on
lateral security. But I believe that is now regarded as a visionary scheme
unworthy of hardheaded bankers, and credit agencies tend to prefer credit-
worthy borrowers, much as other lenders always have. So the net effect has
been to increase land value by lowering the structure of interest rates avail-
able to landowners.
   Some would place Agricultural Experiment Station research on top of
any list of farm programs. Research might seem to be an objective activity,
pushing back frontiers of knowledge, but is it? When did you last heat
anyone frame a research project to help labor get by with less land? Are
242       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

we not rather oriented to the landowner, who wants to "cut cost" by using
less labor? If we ever teach labor to cut costs by dispensing with land, it
is incidental to teaching landowners to raise yields per acre. Landowners
are the effective dient group to whom the AES's staff address themselves.
                                                                                 &s
   I will not labor the income tax advantages of farms—expensing of capi-
tal investments in 'conservation," taking capital gains on sales of breeding
stock, disguising consumption expenditures as business costs, and preferen-
Si laxity of enforcement—because others also receive tax concessions, and
I am not at all sure farmers do as well as oil men or suburban real estate
speculators. But it is interesting how the tax cards are stacked for the
larger landowners. The breeders, whose ranches on the average not only
outspread but outvalue other farm firms, and whose taxable income is
largely land rent, get capital gains. The feeders pay on ordinary income.
   Last, we should mention agriculture's peculiar institution, the bracero. I
can imagine clever arguments delaying our recognition that primarily land-
owners benefit from some other programs, but who would ever have the
effrontery to tell us that cheap contract Mexican labor was imported for any
purpose but to increase the economic rent of farm land at the expense of
labor's share? Exemption of native farm labor from minimum wage laws
and social security would seem to have a like purpose and outcome.
   Having taken all the above steps to raise land value, we cap the perfor-
mance by paying the landowner for the privilege of holding idle some of
his bad we have enhanced, so we may pay him more for the produce of his
other lands and lower the bargaining power of his labor and other hired
inputs. It is little wonder, then, that some people feel the "farm" pro-
grams are not that at all, but landowners' programs.

                                     Ill
                           The Shifting of Benefits
WE CANNOT BEGIN to rest, however, with the simple onclusion above.
Piecemeal analysis of each program shows the systematic bias for land-
owners, but beware the fallacy of composition. Critics of the landowner-
conspiracy approach have long pointed out that new lands opened up by
public works, etc., compete with old lands for customers and men and
supplies. Higher yields from landowner-oriented research tend to flood
markets and lower prices.
   The obvious power of landowners over individual decisions may lead us
to overestimate their aggregate power and lead them to their own undoing.
Landowners are organized well, but not perfectly. They dispute the
division of the spoils, and eath state has two senators wherewith to claim its
                                                              -
         -.   -         -         -                                               r




                        Benefits of Farm Programs                         243

share. The logrolling process therefore becomes the basic mechanism for
allocating quotas and other benefits among the senators' clients.
   Logrolling is a process whereby we generally get more river and harbor
improvements then we need. Is it not to be expected, by analogy, that
interstate rivalry for production rights would lead us to grant more than a
monolithic and calculating monopolist would allow? It is the nature of
the political process to give away more than there is. It is the nature of
cartels to stimulate excess capacity. Here we have a mixture of both.
   Some analysts have alleged that lower costs of production will be passed
on to consumers, but that is bad economics. Prices are determined by
supply and demand. If landowners could control aggregate supply they
could capture and keep all the benefits of lower production costs. Whether
benefits are shifted depends on what happens to aggregate supply.
  In a very few programs supply is effectively controlled. Tobacco is the
outstanding case. Just why tobacco programs are so much tighter than
others I am not sure, but I suggest several plausible reasons. There are no
farm consumers of the raw material to apply counterpressures, as with feed
grains. Demand is exceptionally inelastic, there being no near substitutes.
Production control is not a novel idea but goes back to the seventeenth
century. And the public tolerates control on sumptuary grounds much as it
would opium control (except opium is not carcinogenic).
   Most other programs suffer from serious leakage. Not being an active
farm economist, and never having been a policy man, I observe these from
the sidelines, but if my examples are unbalanced or obsolete, I'm sure the
farm economists can improve on them.
   Marketing orders applied to fruit, for example, generally limit output
by proration from existing groves. But there is no effective restraint on
the entry of new groves, except that they, too, are required to create a capac-
ity to produce more than they are allowed to produce, inflating costs all
around. Taking California as the national problem in microcosm, state
and federal subsidies are abetting the entry of new groves by bringing
generous new water supplies to lands with soils and thermal conditions
that fit them for horticulture.
  Voluntary land-retirement programs, like soil bank and emergency feed
grain, do nothing to prevent new acres being plowed up to replace the
banked ones, sometimes by the same man, sometimes in different regions.
The wheat boom in southeastern Colorado, for example, has uncovered a
million acres or so of grassland to replace less erosive land idled elsewhere.
Some acreage control programs are intermittent. Cotton is one. During
wars and other periods of release, new regions hasten to expand their
                                                                                C
244       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

plantings to establish histories of production as a basis for future quotas—
how else has California dealt itself into the cartel?
   Some programs are limited to so-called "commercial" counties, where
production is centered. The predictable result is the spread of the con-
trolled and supported crop to noncommercial counties. Some crops, like
wheat, grow better in noncommercial counties anyway and the eastward
backlash of wheat has done much to help burst controls on that crop.
  Some programs let "non-compliance pmducers" sell whatever they will
without subsidy.
   Some programs reap a whirlwind of substitution. The corn program is
the most extreme case in point. It seems that the American hog and steer
are quite omnivorous and thrive on small grains too. So the corn program
has become the feed-grain program, but the net has yet to be cast wide
enough to stop the principle that scarcity breeds substitution. The animals
also like silage, sorghums, soybeans, concentrates, hay, pasture, and who
knows what else? One can only hope that the easterly movement of wheat
and the westerly movement of feed grains may stop short of complete
reversal of regional specialization based on comparative advantage.
   It also seems the American consumer is willing to substitute cheap white
meat for dear red meat within some limits, and feed-conversion ratios in
all livestock enterprises are subject to remarkable improvement under the
pressure of dear feed. It's no great trick, after all, to dop off a few
marginal months before slaughter, and that is only one of many ways to
cut down on the beasts' board bills. Consumers also take synthetic fibers,
worry about lung cancer, and heaven knows where this weight-reduction
fad may lead.
  Substitution can also work for feed grains. When we limit a "milkshed"
by marketing order, we run into what Arthur C. Bunce called the "second-
ary elasticity of production." Producers, that is, can import feed from
outside the millcshed. That is like importing land.
   In fine, farm commodity groups face the dassical problem of all cartels,
the price-umbrella syndrome. Organized owners of superior resources cut
back output to maintain price, and, under this "umbrella," outsiders expand
output and find loopholes to invade the sheltered market. The cartel a-
pands to control the interlopers and new ones appear, until a final dissolu-
tion which leaves a legacy of excess capacity, much of it irreversible. Eco-
nomic history is littered with the corpses of cartels thus destroyed by their
own machinations.
   The farm commodity cartels are rather more vulnerable to overexpansion
because their board of directors is the Congress of the United States, which




                                                                                I
                                                                                  .




                        Benefits of Farm Programs                        245

includes the voices of fifty major and countless minor jurisdictions, plus the
increasingly restive consumers. So, politically, the stage is set for a-
pansion. Economically, there is hardly a state within which several com-
modities cannot be produced at support prices. The long-run supply
elasticity of farm products is high, within the relevant range. Let us enum-
erate several reasons why.
   A. There is ample marginal land to bring in, wherever politics allows it.
In a few cases, like tobacco, land as such has almost ceased to be a meaning-
ful constraint on output—only the right to use it has value. In some con-
texts we may properly speak of land as £xed in supply—in tax matters, the
supply in one taxing jurisdiction is fixed. But in commodity matters, land
is versatile. Since "farm" programs are specific commodity programs, all
land used for other commodities may be transferred over. In the Tulare
Basin counties, for example, there are countless thousands of acres in
alfalfa and pasture, using four or five feet of water per year, just panting
for the signal to shift over to cotton. In the nation there are millions of
acres of crop land in pasture.
   In the aggregate, the supply of farm land is of course less elastic, but yet
quite responsive in the long run to high prices and advancing knowledge
and technique. The quiet resurrection of the dust bowl through adaptation
of culture and species to local conditions is one of the monuments of our
times. The conversion of badly drained hardpan Putnam soils of central
Missouri to first-class crop land required mainly better traction and cheaper
lime and nitrogen. Alkali "wasteland" around Raisin City, California, is
now growing cotton and grapes, thanks to gypsum and lower water tables.
Deep-well turbine pumps and cheap rural power have reopened many desert
lands to settlement. In all states, expansion and improvement of the state
and local networks of rural roads and utilities has brought immense new
land supplies into contact with the market.
  B. Political-economic power attaches to many marginal lands. The
owners have the muscle to claim that combination of public works and
production rights that rations out shares in the American way of life. The
Free Coinage of Western Senators is only one example—its effect on the
westward movement of farm production is not hard to trace.
  Some marginal lands, especially hard scrabble hill lands, attract the
politically inert. Other lands, presently submarginal but potentially supe-
rior, gravitate to very different kinds of owners. These lands fall to
"strong hands," to those who can afford to pay a present price for a remote
future chance of great gain, and who know how to bring political pressure
to assure the gains. The west side of the San Joaquin Valley and the
246         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Mississippi Delta are in point. The strong hands provide political leader-
ship and money. Many weaker hands provide votes. Together they keep                        a
bringing new lands into production.
    C. "Marginal" land often produces high yields per acre. "Marginal"
land evokes the image of low yields, frequent drought and crop failure,
and the like, and to be sure that is one side of it. But land may be mar-                      H

ginal due to high costs rather than low yields. It may be separated from
its market by high transportation costs. It may require heavy capital out-
lays for water supply or drainage. It may need heavy doses of labor or
fertilizer, or heavy farm investment in trees, stock, or buildings. And then
it may outyield superior lands by many fold, even though its net rent after
costs is dose to nothing.
    The marginality of lands should not be described or measured in terms
of yields, nor yet in terms alone of net rents per acre. To foresee the effects
of price changes we need to know the ratio of non-land costs to gross
revenues. The difference of those two is net rent; their ratio is an inipor-
tant supplemental datum which I will christen the "intensity quotient"
 (i.q.). Marginal land of high i.q. answers to what some writers have de-
scribed as land of "high capacity and low efficiency." My excuse for new
terminology is expository—emphasizing the ratio helps bring out important
leverage effects.
  The net rent of land of high i.q. is highly leveraged. If i.q. = .95, a
5 per cent rise of price means a 100 per cent rise of net rent. If i.q. = 1.05,
the land is submarginal but crosses the threshold of use when price rises,
or cost falls, by more than 5 per cent.3 And when such land enters the
game, it throws on the market outputs that answer not to its low net rent but
to its high gross yields. It is the vehide, if you will, by which large num-
bers of non-land inputs enter the market on a minimum base of raw land
value.
  Speaking broadly, these auxiliary non-land inputs include public ones as
well as private. Often, as we have seen, public inputs are financed from
outside the benefitted area and may then be applied even when benefits
are well below costs. By this means, not just marginal but submarginal
raw land crosses the threshold and comes on production.
  The high leverage on the rent of these marginal lands of high i.q. tends
to make their owners political activists. They have a great deal more to
gain and lose by higher and lower prices than the well-cushioned owners
of superior lands of low i.q. Like Avis, they try harder—harder for quotas
     Bunce makes this point using his tests of "efficiency," "capacity," and "elasticity
of production." A. C Bunce, Economics of Soil Conservation, p. 38.

                                                                                                   k
                       Benefits of Farm Programs                         247

and public works. They have everything to gain by getting the outside
public to assume some small percentage of their costs. And they are
dogged interlopers, hard to wall out of any sheltered market for long.
  The type of these marginal lands of high i.q. are irrigated lands in the
arid states. They are far from market, they require artificial water supply
and, in some farm enterprises, absorb large inputs of labor and private
capital per acre. They could flood the Chicago and New York markets
with potatoes and apples and vegetables and other western specialties with-
out beginning to return to their owners a net rent at all commensurate with
their share of the market. Most of the value is added along the way by
non-land inputs and non-farm inputs.
   Some of these irrigable lands, to be sure, rise to very high acre values.
But let us not be deceived into taking that as an index to their net value
to the economy. Part and often all of the private values represent heavy
elements of subsidy, including a transcontinental freight rate structure that
carries potatoes from Kern County, California, to New York City for only
150 per cent more than the rate from Aroostook County, Maine. Many
lands now busily supplying large shares of the market and yielding rents
to their owners are, in an over-all social accounting, well below the margin.
  The arid states are the type, but not the whole genus by any means.
There are also marginal lands in the East and Midwest and South. Land
may be remote not just because it is at the end of continental transportation
lines; it may be beyond the local networks. And within the farm it may
be remote from the center of storage and operations. Or it may require
unusually heavy inputs for draining or fertilizing or stabilizing. The loose
economy of land which has characterized our entire national experience
has left a latent reserve of by-passed acres in all regions. Much of this
marginal land is "high i.q.," with high gross yields per acre.
   In analyzing aggregate national and world supply, the farm-to-market
transportation input should certainly be counted heavily as a non-land (or
non-farm land) input that leverages the net rents of lands at the end of long
hauls. It may be just an accident of geography, but yet a fact, that our
greatest national reservoir of good soils fans out west of the Ozarks along
the tier of prairie states, speciously central yet increasingly remote from
major populations on the two coasts. These are high-yielding lands, too,
and a small percentage price rise can convert many of them to feed grains,
with overwhelming results. Perhaps we should describe much of this as
transfer of land from pasture to plow, rather than extension of the margin,
but the effect on output is much the same whatever we call it.
   Here we should note the differential importance of price stability to the




                                                                                ii
248        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

usability of high i.q. lands. The higher the leverage on net rent, the
greater is the value of price stability to a landowner, because the greater
is the percentage reduction in variation of his net income. One aim of
price support programs is, of course, stability. To the extent they succeed,
they do more for high i.q. land than low. If we include transportation
among our non-land inputs, we find high leverage lands farther from
markets. Since the area of a circle increases with the square of its radius,
and since the great mid-continental Golconda of prairie soils is far from
markets, price stability acts strongly to bring on new lands of high gross
yields.
   I). There is also great supply elasticity from superior lands, through
elevation of their i.q.'s. This is, indeed, the most commonly cited cause
for the impotence of acreage restriction as a supply control. We pour
more non-land inputs onto limited acres and discover, to the evident sur-
prise of many, that the curves of marginal product and marginal cost run
parallel and horizontal over a long range so that a slight rise of price or
drop of costs can lead to great intensification. Lands which Conrad Ham-
mar thought had "high efficiency but low capacity" now, it seems, also have
high capacity (as he had originally suspected when he and Muntzell first
wrote of their surprisingly low man-land ati' The latent capacity
simply was not fully used.
   Here, again, our concept of i.q. provides an easy explanation. Suppose
—and this is realistic—a farmer has a choice between two different inten-
sities of land use, A and B. A yields slightly less net rent per acre, but at
a low i.q. of .50. Shifting to B means higher net rent, but at the cost of a
much higher i.q. of .85. He might very well prefer A. High i.q.'s are
uncomfortable and risky: a slight fall of price and one is wiped out; a
strike or labor shortage can be disastrous; bad weather is murder. Or the
farmer may have taken too seriously the bad advice of certain public ser-
vants who advise us to maximize benefit-cost ratios on public works—that
being comparable to minimizing the i.q. The low i.q. enterprise—barley
or onions, for example—yields much less than the high, but it yields a safe,
steady return each year, without acute management problems and with
plenty of slack to cover mistakes and contingencies.
   Now suppose we support prices 15 per cent above their former level.
The .85 i.q. enterprise now nets twice as much as formerly, the .50 i.q.
    'C. Hanmar and J. H. Munazell, "Intensity of Land Use and the Resettlement Prob-
1cm in Missouri," Journal of Farm Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 409—22 (1935). C. Hsmmar,
"Intensity and Land Rent," Journal of Farm Economics, Vol. 20, pp. 776—91 (1938).
I have long been sorry that 1-lammar, in the 1938 article, persuaded himself that the
factor disproportions disclosed in 1935 were rationalizable. I suspect they betrayed
seriom economic imbalances.
                        Benefits of Farm Programs                          249

enterprise only 1.30 times as much. That tends to overcome the land-
owner's natural aversion to risk and worry and entice him to lay out more
for non-land inputs. Leverage! How little we have appreciated its latent
power to multiply yields. Give the farmer a place to stand, and he can
lift the world.
   A recent Iowa study of corn yields5 condudes that Iowa alone could
supply the nation's output of feed grain, if only all farmers improved
their practices to the standard currently observed by the most advanced
managers. It is not likely the other states will soon give her the chance
to prove it; but it gives a notion what giants in the earth we stir when we
pry open the gap between prices and costs.
    E. Submarginality of land needs to be conceived over time. Some lands
yield a nice rent surplus for a few years until some limitational input, like
ground water, gives out.
   Now we have established a fairly definite policy of public rescue of such
areas—their residents do vote, after all, and they also benefit from a pecu-
liar combination of public admiration for the self-reliant frontiersman and
pity for the welfare case.
  That encourages settlement of such lands in anticipation of public
rescue. As the ground water drops, the legislative wheels grind out canals
and dams and whatever else it takes to save this "established" area from
natural disaster. By this process, many lands otherwise submarginal can
enter production, even before the public works are built on which they
depend.
   F. Finally, there is the aversion of the American people to philosophical
consistency. We may praise it as "pluralism" or damn it as "indecision,"
but what we do with the right hand we often undo with the left. So if we
are not quite sure we are doing right to idle land, we support a host of
counter programs to reclaim new land, and gloss over the contradiction
with talk of "reserves for future crises" and "interregional equity"—
euphemisms for excess capacity and senatorial logrolling.
  Added to that, we have the inertia of existing expansive programs. The
juggernaut in motion is nearly irresistible. If it meets a few immovable
objects, it detours them and chugs massively on. The agencies and their
dient groups are not much concerned with their aggregate supply impact.
They want their share of the melon in any event. With the innocence of
babes they tote up benefit-cost ratios based on support prices, and zero-
interest costs, to justify probing deeper and deeper below the economic
    5Wm. Shrader and N. Landgren, "Land Use Implications of Agricultural ProducSn
 Potentals," in L. Fischer (ed.), Shif is in Land Use, Nebraska A.E.S., 1964.
250        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

margin of cultivation. The higher we hold price, the greater pressure we
put behind the movements for developing new lands.
   Sometimes we hear that new lands do not compete with old but produce
different crops. That is of course promotional drivel. All foods compete
for the same shelf space and stomach space and budget dollars. If new
lands do not compete directly in corn or wheat, they do indirectly by releas-
ing older lands transferable to corn or wheat.
  In sum, the supply of farm land in the long run may be regarded as
quite elastic to price, and the supply of farm products even more so through
substitution of non-land for land inputs, or intensification. It may be,
then, that the complex of farm programs is playing the same kind of
ironic twist on landowners as the Homestead Act and its associated sub-
sidies to hasten rail penetration of the heartland. The rails, you recall,
each worked to raise land values near the routes but in the aggregate
brought in so much land as virtually to destroy its unit value by the 1880's
and 1890's, bringing on Populism and Bryan. Is that what the omens now
portend?
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

                                    (Continued)


                           Plea of the Newborn
THE YOUTH, of course, is an innovator by the fact of his birth. There he
stands, newly born on the planet, a universal beggar, with all the reason of
things, one would say, on his side. In his first consideration to feed,
clothe, and warm himself, he is met by warnings on every hand that this
thing and that thing have owners, and that he must go elsewhere. Then
he says, "If I am born into the earth, where is my part? Have the good-
ness, gentlemen of this world, to show me my wood-lot, where I may fell
my woods, my field where I may plant my corn, my pleasant ground where
to build my cabin."
   "Touch any wood, or field, or house-lot, on your peril," cry all the gen-
tlemen of the world. "But you may come and work in ours and we shall
give you a piece of bread." [From the essay, "Man, the Conservative."]
                                                  RALPH WALDO EMERSON
              The Benefits of Farm Programs, II
                 Incidence, Shifting, and Dissipation
                              By MasoN GAFFNEY

                                        Iv
                         The Dissipation of Net Benefits
  A. The Short Run
  If landowners are ruining themselves by too much success, that is not
yet apparent in the value of farm land, which keeps rising in the face of
falling farm income. How do we account for this perverse behavior?
It is a complex phenomenon of many causes. The analysts' problem is
to get some feel for their relative weight.
  In part it is a matter of lag and recovery. From 1940 to 1950 land
values lagged farm income; now they are making it up. But in 1940
we had great excess capacity in land, a fact which goes far to explain the
lag of land values in the forties. A return to the low income-value ratio
of 1940 is not necessarily a return to a stable or desirable norm. Let us
table this point for later reappraisal.
   In some areas landowners' share of the product may be rising. Farm
wage rates, which multiplied in the forties, seem to have dropped in the
fifties as wartime demands for common labor gave way to the modern
emphasis on training and skill. Tenants have been displaced, where cus-
tomary cop shares gave them too much of the pie, by managers and ma-
chines. Farm expansion pressures in many areas have let land claim a
marginal value greater than its average net value. Cheaper fertilizer and
insecticide and herbicide have cut costs. "Conservation" measures once
thought essential are being abandoned for cheaper alternatives—for er
ample, cop rotation for continuous corn and fertilizer. If we onsider
how much we have to pay to get farmers to put a few million acres in retire-
ment programs, and extrapolate the implied annual value àf land to all
American farm land, we get an annual value equal to the entire "farm"
income.
   Even on such fragmentary evidence it is hard to avoid conceding con-
siderable weight to the thesis of a rising landowner's share. Since farm
prices have not been rising, the implication seems to be that lower costs
have been captured by landowners in higher net rents.
   * A paper delivered at the annual meetings of the American Farm Economics Minds-
don, StiHwater, Oklahoma, 1965.
'   418       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

       Of course, urban expansion is also boosting land values over many areas.
    In 1958 1 estimated the area of urban price influence at 100 million acres.
    It was a safe guess, because it is not a statement subject to precise evalua-
    tion. What is "urJan price influence," anyway? Farms near town have
    always been worth more, and "part-time" farmers, both poor and rich,
    have always drifted back and forth, from commuting to farming, of the dirt
    or gentleman variety. In this broader sense, 200 or 300 million acres
    might have been the better figure then, and certainly would be now after
    another eight years of sprawL
      We are all familiar with the explosion of recreation demand. This, too,
    is largely a kind of urban demand: most upper-dass suburbs, indeed,
    evolved from snnmer resorts. Today, recreation demand in the extended
    sense dominates some entire states, notably Vermont and New Hampshire;
    and in all states its force is felt, sometimes over areas as large as Vermont or
    New Hampshire. It is often the salvation of regions whose net income
    from farm products would not sustain land values.
      We should not think of residential-recreational values as spurious "non-
    farm" influences. They are subject to different cycles than crop income
    and bear separate analysis on that account. But they represent real eco-
    nomic values, phychic and implicit though they may be. Improved urban-
    rural access has genuinely added to the production power of rural land to
    answer real human wants, of a kind that full-time farmers have always
    appreciated.
      In addition to conversion to urban use, and partial conversion of full-time
    to part-time and recreational farms, there is an important set of indirect
    effects of urban eicpansion on farm land values. Urban expansion sends
    out shock waves of land-use conversion that travel through the entire hier-
    archy of farm enterprises as each beginsto invade lands in the next less
    intensive use. This effect is most observable in California, with its great
    variety of enterprise and its steep gradient of intensities. As subdividers
    pull orchards to Sake way for metropolitan Los Angeles and SAn Francisco,
    the orchardists push out, carrying with theni a new higher intensity and
    standard of land values. They sprinkle themselves about here and there
    in a kind of low-density horticultural sprawl, inflating land values over
    wider areas than could ever find markets if all were actually in producing
    groves. The trees drive out vines or vegetables. These replace dairies or
     cotton, which in turn press on barley, and so clear to the lowliest wilderness
     use—where they meet the wrath of the Sierra Club.
       The whole process is calculated to add to farm land values—and perhaps
                      Jienejtts of Farm Programs, 11                       419

ultimately to farm output. The second, we will see, i5 deferred. The first
is immediate.
 Mineral rights is another cause for high farm values. In all areas where
mineral rights have not yet been reserved from surface rights, the prospect
of future lease payments and royalties may dominate values. William
Scofield, who does such an excellent job of reporting on farm real estate
values, would be hard pressed, I think, with his limited staff, to untie the
bundle of rights in the Williston Basin, or Oklahoma, or Morrow County,
Ohio, or Kern County, California, and report only on price changes based
on farm influences alone. The stepped-up search for oil in the United
States is no small matter. Oil royalties and leases and bonuses paid to
passive landowners run $2 to $3 billions yearly, and the hope of cutting
in on the bonanza certainly boosts farm values in areas of good mineral
prospects, possibly out of all proportion to the sober probabilities of success.
  So we are not at a loss for, reasons to explain the paradox of rising farm
real estate values and falling farm income. But there is another and more
important reason.
    Many farm programs, of public works and production research, rnhttnce
the capacity of land to yield income. Land values respond to that higher
capacity immediately; actual production comes along much more slowly. A
handful of alert innovators seize on new possibilities and convert their land
 to the new uses. In the process they often buy land, at values reflecting in
 part the income from higher use. Since only 2 to 3 per cent of farms, and
 a smaller percentage of land, turnover each year, these few-purchases by
 aggressive innovators loom large in the sales figures which we then blow
 up to estimate the aggregate value of all land.
     We need to distinguish carefully a rise in the unit value of land of con-
 stant quality, and arise in aggregate values brought on by qualifying land
 for higher use. Consider the analogy of urban expansion. We often read
 that urban land values are rising, but that has not been generally true for
 some years. Rather, they are spreading out. Rural land appr&iates when
 it becomes convertible to urban use. But older urban land is more homo-
 geneous and a truer indicator of the trend of urban land values per se. It
 has been falling in many areas.
     So when new water supply qualifies dry range land for citrus and olives,
  it is not the unit value of homogeneous land that rises. Rather, the pre-
  mium value of irrigated land has been spread thinner, to the potential dis-
  comfiture of owners of older irrigated land.. Older producing areas would
 give a truer index to the trend of land values of homogeneous quality—if
  we exclude those that have, in turn, been, invaded by the city.
    420       The American Journal 0/ Economics and Sociology
                                                                                    I
                                                                                    51

                                                                                    I
       Few conversions of farm land use are as neat and easily defined as the
    conversion to irrigation. There are many margins and many degrees of
    intensity, over1appingand intermingled. But the general principle is the
    same. Conversion ol land to higher use, enabled by new public works,
    or new techniques, is not the same as a rise in the value of homogeneous
    land. Conversion increases the aggregate effective supply.
       The distinction would be less crucial if the new capabilities of land were
    quickly exploited. Then the new supply would lower prices, older lands'
    value would suffer, and aggregate land values would accurately reflect land
     income. But in practice the supersession of land uses is a matter of gen-
     erations, as Ray Teele, David Weeks and Charles West, Roy Huffman, and
    other water economists have abundantly demonstrated. In the transition,
     land has a value based on expectation of higher use but markets no products
     commensurate with the value. Since this is land of high i.q., as a rule, it
     must ultimately market products more than commensurate with its value
     to warrant the value. Just who will buy those products, and at what prices,
    is a problem we defer. Meantime, we expand the area of land whose
    value is premised on intensive use. We increase values of those lands
    without paying the penalty of higher output and lower price.
      That is, I think, the prime factor in today's land price paradox. It is
    not in competition with other explanations, but helps tie them together.
    The lag of land values behind farm income in the 1940's reflected the
    preexistent excess capacity in land, brought on by premature public works
4   and production research in the twenties and thirties, and we are now return-
    ing to a comparable condition. Urban price influence affects an area many
    times greater than is actually converted to urban use, or ever could be
    without deflating values to nothing. The larger share of landowners in
    farm income reflects cost reductions that have not yet brought in enough
t   new land to shift the benefits forward in lower prices. In the short run,
    the buildup of new areas even absorbs as inputs some of the output of older
    areas—breeding stock, seed, or feed, for example. And investment of
    non-farm inputs in areas requiring heavy public works adds to local de-
    mands for food and diverts local labor from farming.
      Thus, if retribution is to come, it is deferred. Meantime, the gratifica-
    tions of the system are immediate. Higher land values are enjoyed all
    around. The mere fact that owners do not take quick advantage of them
    does not mean they do not appreciate them. The individual can always
    sell, or mortgage, and most of us like to have options that we can exercise
    at our leisure.
       A system of instant pleasure and deferred pain lends itself nicely to the
                      Benefits of Farm Programs, 1!                      421

demands of the American political process. Short-run electoral survival
is paramount; long-run problems may fall on one's successors, Little won-
der, then, that we have had so much trouble avoiding contradictions in our
farm policy.

  B. The Long Run
  In the long run it seems inevitable that the euphoria induced by the long
lag of supply response should give way before the weight of massive new
capacity.
   In the short run, implicit rent is a lax taskmaster. In a period of rising
land values it is especially so because the annual increment to value is a
species of income from land which helps cover carrying costs. Even with
steady land values, implicit rent merely represents an opportunity, a carrot
without a stick. It is an option open primarily to those who need it least,
those affluent enough to own land, and who are least likely to exercise the
option to its utmost.
   But over time more of the implicit rent becomes explicit. Fixed charges
build up. Land changes hands at high values and is mortgaged. Property
taxes and land assessments respond to the higher base. And of course
each year a few more owners jump at the carrot, regardless of the stick.
The demonstration effect of progressive innovators is contagious. Older
capital depreciates and its replacement affords the occasion to intensify.
Older farmers retire. The collateral of high land values lures more capital
into agriculture. High cHng prices for land make intensification an ever
more attractive alternative to land expansion. And social prestige shifts
from the old to the new way of life, and the latest equipment becomes a
status symbol.
   The result could be a dramatic price collapse, one which would be wor-
sened by liquidation of farm capital and a panic rush to cash in on fugitive
opportunities. But we have forestalled much of that by our program of
price supports. If they cannot hold prices forever in the face of surpluses,
they can at least preside over an orderly retreat to ever lower percentages of
parity. Thus farm landowners never have to take the full force of the
debacle of the cycle of overexpansion in one blow—their world can not end
with a bang but with a whimper.
   The trouble with that policy is that supply curves are irreversible. New
techniques discovered and disseminated under the stimulus of high price
are not forgotten when prices drop. New regions are not abandoned, new
roads not, rolled back up, new dams not unbuilt, new quotas and congres-
sional districts not relinquished. Slow as positive supply response may be,
                                                                                1:




422       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

negative response• to lower prices is much slower and in some conditions
even perverse. So wben we ride down the supply curve by lowering sup-
port prices, it is not the same curve we rode up, but much steeper.' The             4

new equilibrium price is lower than what we would have obtained had we
never supported prices. That is the landowners' deferred retribution.
   The process has some of the marks of a boom and bust cycle like that of
irrigation from i918—40. But modern farm policy has made it more of a
continuous process. Suffering and retribution do not always bring educa-
tion and understanding. No lights flash or bells ring to announce the
period of retribution and penance. No one resolves to foreswear support-
ing prices above market. On the contrary, the new free market price at
the bottom of the steep downwards supply curve generates acute vertigo
and a firm resolve to avoid the perils of full competition.
  So, in our "orderly retreat" from insupportable prices, we drop them a
peg or two but continue to support them above a free market equilibrium,
which falls progressively lower by virtue of the fact that we are holding
prices above it. A pretty dilemma, indeed! We fear to unbottle the
productive genies we have awakened by price supports; but the same high
prices which we fear they would undercut keep awakening more genies
than we can control.
  The result is surpluses and excess capacity—at or below price levels that
would have prevailed had there been no farm programs. And we con-
tinue to add to the irreversible excess capadty; not as fast as we would at
100 per cent of parity, but faster than we would at the new equilibrium
price.
  The greatest beneficiaries are the owners of marginal land of high i.q.
brought into the market by this or that subsidy. The losers include the
owners of superior land who ultimately have to share what might have been
their market with 'others whose share of political power exceeded their
share of natural land value. Consumers may ultimately benefit by lower
prices, although that depends on the fate of production controls and diver-
sion programs, and if consumers do finally gain they will have earned it.
Taxpayers are big losers, and we all, lose as balked consumers of the
various useful goods and services that might be produced with the non-
land input poured into needless public works and development of high
i.q. land. (The argument that these inputs would be wasted anyway
 hardly warrants a reply.) Recreationists are losers as agriculture invades
'and redaims more and more wild land it never needed.
   The distribution of gain and loss is less important than the fact that the
                      Benefits of Farm Programs, II                      423

aggregate loss exceeds the gain by a wide margin. The ultimate end to-
wrd which the programs are drifting is dissipation of the benefits in sheer
waste. The waste consists basically in locking up the latent productive
power it superior land, duplicating it at great private and social cost on the
desert, in the swamps, and in the baCkWOOdS, and then locking up part of
the duplicate land as well. We deny ourselves full advantage of our landed
heritage and even of the capital we substitute for it. We produce at real
human cost what nature wants to yield freely above our efforts.
  Location and regional specialization are badly distorted. Land bat
suited for corn is diverted to hay or small grain, while corn invades the
wheatlands and wheat tears the cover off erosive grasslands. Land near
cities goes into low uses while remote land goes into horticulture magnify-
ing the transportation bill and the farm-market spread. We spread thin
the economic rent that would under an economic regimen focus on better
soils and location. We can hardly blame the trucks and railroads then if
they take a larger slice of the food budget
   Public enterprise is magnified at the expense of private. The system is a
combination of artificial scarcity and artificial abundance of land. Within
the given framework of social overhead capital and infrastructure we create
an artificial scarcity by idling land and taxing private capital needed to
fructify it. Concurrently we create an artificial abundance of land by sub-
sidizing tax-free public works, transport-utility extensiOns, and jroduthon
research. The net result is replacement of competitive private by public
enterprise and semi-public regulated monopoly enterprise. We can hardly
wonder, then, if taxes rise and if large corporations and bureaus dominate
more of economic life.
  Jnswn,weareleftwithheavycostsandfewbenefits. Ashighasfarm
real estate values have soared, they still hardly represent more than a capi-
talization at the going rate of the annual budget of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, not to mention some $2 billion charged to "foreign aid" that
really belongs in the agriculture budget, plus public works charged to the
Department of the Interior, and to the Army, and other billions in the other
pràgrains mentioned earlier. The benefits are dissipated in the terrible
contradictions of the programs.
   In coming to this unhappy state, land plays the role of the Lorelei. The
siren song that leads the sailors on the shoals is the lure of unearned incre-
ment. Land is ideally cast for the Lorelei role. It is immobile between
congressional districts and so captures net benefits to districts brought home
by the congressmen. That makes it the coin for paying off political re-
                                                                                I
424        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

tainers. It is the ideal medium for promising more than can be delivered,
because the lag is so long before most landowners capitalize on new op-
portunities.
  And so our surplus problem traces back to the implicit national policy of
high land values for everyone. To straighten out our farm economy we
need some fundamental reappraisal of the prevailing system of artificial
scarcity to enhance some land values and public works to enhance others.
University of Visconsin—M ii wake,

                 Vital Need for Forest Co,snvation
AT CANADA'S National Forestry Conference in 1966, some forecasts were
reported by it. It Fowler, president of the Canadian Pulp nd Paper Asso-
ciation who was chairman of the plenary session. The demand for pulp
and paper 34 years hence is expected to be 5½ times that of today; require-
ments of hardwood are expected to nearly double by 1975; the dnnnnd for
softwood lumber and plywood is expected to grow by nearly 50 per cent
by 1975 and to double the 1975 figure by 2000. "We can say," the chair-
man commented, "that a major effort. is going to be needed to obtain these
possible levels of demAnd. When welook to2000 AD. it is quite dear
that with present methods and arrangements we will not have enough wood
to meet the estimated demands."
   That is the industrial aspect, but we must not forget that the forest has
other uses and virtues. Visitors find the appearance of the woods enchant-
big, and every tree, taken singly, is beautiful. These visitors are consumers
of goods and services. Their expenditures benefit merchants, farmers, la-
bourers, hotels, and many others. The new money they bring into the
country is an important factor in our balance of international payments.
   The tree that is felled and floated or trucked away to the sawmill or
pulp mill becomes the raw material of another existence, takes on a new
life. A dead tree put to use becomes something lively and profitable. But
it must be replaced by a living, growing, tree.
   The forests are renewable. Nature will see to this if not interfered with.
But they can be despoiled or killed, not to be renewed in mortal time. If
we interfere with Nature's way in the forests then we must use our talent
to maintain them.
   Good citizenship calls upon every citizen to require and support an
enduring forestry program, and to accept his own personal responsibility
for forest conservation. [From the Royal Bank of Canada Monthly Letter.]
