                               Land Rent, Taxation
                                and Public Policy:
                            Taxation and the Functions
                              of Urban Land Rent*

                                   By MASON GPNEY

                                                I
                      TAXATION AND THE FUNCTIONS OF RENT
    MANY, IF NOT ALL economists now agree that the fisc may tax away rent
    without impairing any economic function. It is only necessary that the tax
    be independent of landowner behavior.
      What is less widely understood is that not taxing rent obstructs its
    proper functioning. Untaxed landowners through the centuries have
    manifested a propensity for passive withdrawal that is simply too wide-
    spread to overlook and too well proven to redocument.
      Some who have advocated (or opposed) "taxing land into use," while
    correct in their prediction of results, have basically iniscontrued the nature
    of the policy: they see the tax as being piled on top of market rent, and


'   amending the market. This is to be innocent of the basic process of land
    tax capitalization, briefly summarized by Jensen (1931)t (and curiously
    missing from the literature since). The costs of carrying or holding land
    each year are interest and property taxes, each being a percentage (respec-
    tively i and t) of selling price (P). If tax rate (t) rises, P falls, reducing
    the interest burden (P x i) by the same amount that taxes rise. Taxes
    and interest between them always just exhaust the total rent (a) (1).
    The public share of rent is
                                     t+i ; the private share is t+i
       Those who do understand tax capitalization sometimes note that land
    taxes are not necessary to make landowners economize, but simply sub-
    stitute a tax cost for an interest cost. They are right in a limited way.
    But the naive fellow who thinks taxes force land into use is right, too.
       * Based on a paper delivered at the 15th annual meeting of the Regional Science
    Association, Cambridge, Mass., November 9, 1968. Portions of die study appear in
    Papers of the Regional Science Association; thanks are due the editor for permission to
    reprint. This article continues the discussion in my previous paper: "Land Rent, Taxation,
    and Public Policy: The Sources, Nature and Functions of Urban Land Rent," Am. J.
    Ecos. Sociol., 31 (July, 1972).
       t Bibliograjthical citations are to items in "Selected Bibliography on Land Rent Taxa-
    don," Am. J. Econ. Sociol., 31 (July 1972).
          The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

The operation of the tax is simply more subtle than at first glance. I will
enumerate five ways that land taxation helps rent perform its functions: by
by-passing price discrimination in credit; by reducing land appreciation;
by obviating other taxes which bias land use choices; by replacing log-
rolling as a paramount guide to public spending; and by overcoming land
market imperfections.

A. Price Discrimination in Credit. The poor pay more for credit. They
get less, and for shorter periods. The basis of allocating credit is not
primarily demand, or productivity, but collateral security. It is the credit
rating of the borrower that covers the lenderts risk, regardless of the pur-
pose of a loan.
   And so capital markets make liquid assets flow uphill, from poorer
lenders, who prize liquid investments like bank accounts, to richer bor-
rowers, to whom banks lend money because, in the popular phrase, they
don't need it; who are big enough to diversify to cover risks, and to pay
regular interest while awaiting late-blooming returns.
   Many affluent landowners are even stronger; they do not have to borrow
at all. The interest cost they feel when holding land is only imputed
interest, at their opportunity rate. Capital markets are extremely insular,
with high transfer costs. Many corporations plow back earnings to defer
taxes, aggrandize management, inflate (rail and utility) rate bases, etc.
Many heirs, heiresses, and retired farmers are not sharply aware of or re-
sponsive to mere imputed costs that cause no cash drain; and the absence
of cash drain over several years also protects them from a "wealth effect,"
a loss of net wealth that otherwise finally would force their attention
upon any drain. So the force of imputed interest as a holding cost is
wealdy felt by affluent landowners, as compared to an explicit cash pay-
ment of rent or taxes.
  The price one pays for land, as a yearly cost, is proportional to an in-
terest rate. The relevant rate is one's borrowing rate—or, for equity in-
vestment, one's opportunity rate. And so rich and poor pay different
prices for holding the same land. This is price discrimination, but in
reverse. The usual discrimination, with lower prices to weaker buyers,
can be socially useful by broadening markets for decreasing-cost opera-
tions. This reverse discrimination in credit, on the other hand, redoubles
the ineffectiveness of the demand of the poor for land.
   There is no factor that acts with as much force as land cost, therefore,
to screen out the bottom of the market for housing, small business, and
other land-using activities. Look at it as adding to yearly interest cost, as
                 Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                     19

above; or look at it as inflating the buyer's capital requirement: either way,
it hits the poor with differential severity.
    It is natural that the poor should demand somewhat less land, in pro-
portion to their lesser incomes, and even in lesser proportion than that
because land as a consumer good, after a bare minimum, is a "superior"
one, a luxury (Eichler-Kaplan 1967). But these are demand factors, not
to be confused with the matter of credit, which is an added cost of supply.
Credit discrimination means the poor pay more for any piece of land.
    Of course, credit discrimination also means the poor pay more for all
durable goods. But the interest share of the cost of any asset varies with
its durability. The other share of cost is depreciation or capital depletion,
which God sendeth upon poor and rich alike. An asset must have a useful
life of 30—40 years before interest is as large a share of its yearly cost as
depreciation (2). But land does not depreciate as a matter of course at
all, so its entire holding cost (in the absence of taxes) is interest.
    More, land often appreciates. The coming event casts its shadow be-
fore it in premium land prices. The interest cost of holding appreciating
land now outvalues its current service flow—just the opposite from build-
ings. The poor man's handicap grows heavier—he requires more credit
to finance each dollar of current cash income.
    If we treat appreciation as a deduction from holding costs, and deduct
a given amount—say 3 per cent of value—from the interest holding costs
of poor and rich, it is dear how this factor exacerbates any differences in
basic interest costs. It is a principle of leverage. A poor man's basic
interest rate of 9 per cent falls to a net holding cost of 6 per cent; a rich
man's 5 per cent falls to 2 per cent. The ratio of the poor man's cost to
 the rich man's rises from 9/5 = 1.8 to 6/2 3 (3).
    Then there is the matter of risk. We have seen that land, functionally,
 is a "hired" factor like labor that must be paid in advance. A tenant pay-
ing cash rent would not think he could reduce risk by hiring more land.
Much less would an impecunious buyer reduce risk by assuming a full
mortgage to add land whose marginal service flow didn't even cover the
 debt service Inventories and operating capital return prinapal in a few
 months. Even buildings begin to in a few years, and a small shoestring
 operator can often finance a building with a little "front money" of his
 own But land income never returns principal, unless by error of the
 seller. The weak hand can return the principal of a land loan only by
drawing on other assets, or by net saving from income. From the view-
 point of borrower as well as lender, risk is a mimum.
   But when a debt-free landowner is the entrepreneur, he already owns
20        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

the principal, and the payment of imputed rent becomes optional. Each
year's optional rent payment then becomes something he can draw on to
meet deficits. Analytically, the income is implicitly paid (free of income
tax, incidentally) but saved, converted to capital and consumed to meet
the deficit. More than that, he can draw on the capital value of his land
to meet deficits, by banking it. The capital value is 10 to 20 times the
yearly service flow, and more if the land value is rising, so the cushion
against risk is enormous.
   A "weak hand" minimizes risk by hiring or financing a minimum of
land. He selects factor proportions heavy on family labor. He turns his
limited capital fast, to achieve enough volume to realize necessary econo-
mies of scale and keep himseslf fully employed. He keeps most of his
limited net worth in circulating capital, which he can deplete to meet the
risk of a surge in demand, or hold in the face of reduced demand. Lack-
ing reserves of wealth to seize bargains and other timely opportunities,
he compensates by constantly liquidating and reinvesting his capital. Each
recycling gives him a chance to gain from the positive risks of business,
and substitutes for possession of great reserves for contingencies.
  A "strong hand" owns land outright He does not regard it as a risky
investment. Its value to him depends on its long term performance—he
does not need cash every year. Even if it gives him a bad year, or severaI
there is no cash drain. Indeed, he can convert it to cash any time by bor-
rowing or selling. Its capital value for sale or collateral is not usually
much shaken by short run reverses, and often mounts imperturbably to-
ward some higher use. Its capital value is all available to draw on to meet
risk. This capital value is very high relative to current income, espedaliy
for appreciating land. It is not risked with each throw of the dice.
  A strong hand minimizes risk by underusing land. The fact that its
capital value is twenty times its service flow means an incremental land
investment (holding other inputs constant) of $1 adds 5 to expected
annual volume (assume a per cent interest rate). The 5 is well cush-
ioned. An incremental investment in capital (holding land constant) of
$1 adds to volume $1 times the yearly turnover of the capital, plus 5
interest (4). This volume is much less well cushioned.
   Thus it is very common for economists to advise landowners to avoid
improving land to the "theoretically" optimal intensity where the mar-
ginal product of capital equals its marginal cost (5). The last quarter
or so of gross income is said to be of "low quality," because the added
income is so little more than the added cost that it adds to risk out of
proportion to the added net income. In all the years that this doctrine has
                    Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                       21

   flourished, no one has raised the obvious counter-argument that the mar-
   ginal productivity theory is symmetrical: that underimproving land implies
   over-applying land to the improvement so the last quarter of income from
   incremental land is of low quality. Why has it not been raised? Possibly
   economists subconsciously assume the viewpoint of the equity owner of
   land; and from this view, land represents so little personal risk that it is
   ignored.
     Note that the strong hand who regards land holding as a low risk
   investment is minimizing his own risk, not social risk. Because the land
   value on which be draws to meet contingencies is not social capital—it is
   not thrown into any social breach to supply real goods, it is not depleted
   and used. Rather, he uses it to draw on the pool of real social capital,
   taking from others who lack equal collateral. Social contingencies and
   risks are met from real circulating capital. From the national view, it is
   the "weak hand" with his stock of circulating capital who supplies the
   resiliency to bear social risks.
   •  Finally there is the matter of management capacity. A weak hand, we
   have seen, turns his small capital fast in order to employ himself fully.
   Strong hands have the opposite problem. They turn their capital as slowly
   as possible, to minimize their involvement in small decisions, continual
   replacement, hired labor, and customer relations. Land, which never turns
   over, but often appreciates of its own accord, serves them ideally.
      Sometimes a strong hand erects a handsome, prestigious building on
   land, appearing to use it intensively. These are conspicuous, and create
   a widespread impression that richer men improve land more. These pres-
   tige buildings tend to substitute longevity for yearly service flow, so it is
   evident their true intensity is less than their marble columns at first suggest.
   The invisible land input is to commit land for a century to a building that
   will be obsolete and depreciated in half that time. Even less visible is
  the same owner's control of surrounding air rights for his building's view;
r of surrounding land to pick up spillovers from his building; of the land
  under his building for years before he built it; and of dozens of parcels
   of unused land here and there around the world. These matters defy
   most empirical studies because of secrecy, indirect ownership, and world-
   wide ownership by the wealthy. We must therefore give more weight to
   a priori analysis, and its teaching is dear. The comparative advantage of
   the strong hand lies usually in land ownership.
.:    Now we begin to see the significance of substituting tax costs for interest
   costs of holding land. It removes a cost that varies directly with a person's
   poverty, and replaces it with a cOst that bears impartially on all. To be
22         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

sure, this hangs on the assumption that tax assessors are less partial to
the wealthy than bankers are. Some studies have shown assessment bias
favoring larger owners. Others have not, however, and this bias is less
universal than tle bankers'. It is also illegal, and more open to reform.
   The greater effectiveness of tax than interest costs in making rent fulfill
its function surfaces for observation wherever low-density zoners are cam-
paigning to prevent rent from functioning to enforce economy of scarce
land. There is some rhetoric against "greedy" "fast-buck" landowners
who succumb to the temptations of opportunity rent, but the main thrust
is against tax assessors. Low-density zoning keeps down land taxes, and
so removes from most landowners the effective force that stirs them to
economize on land the way economic theory says they should.
  The bad results of not taxing land are severaL First, the poor live
much more crowded than the rich. A study of residential density in Mil-
waukee County (Gaffney 1972), for example, shows 23 per cent of the
population occupying 3 per cent of the residential land area. In terms
of land quality, much of this 3 per cent is in blighted neighborhoods. The
rich preempt the choice neighborhoods and natural features at low density.
Four per cent of the families have 30 per cent of the residential land area.
The exception is the rich in luxury high-rise apartments, but these are
limited by overtaxation and low-rise zoning as not to loom large in overall
datL
   Of course, the poor would live somewhat more crowded than the rich
anyway, because land as a consumer good is a superior good. The rich
like space and they like good neighborhoods, while the first concern of the
poor is better shelter, i.e., the building. But this means that by not taxing
land we are losing an opportunity to tax progressively.
   Second, small business competes at a disadvantage. The seven inter-
national major oil companies like to preempt promising corners. They can
wait for future income; it is their special skill: who can wait as well as
they?
  Third, expanding cities are made to sprawl. Appreciating suburban
land levitates to strong hands, so builders are not often snapping up bar-
gains from hungry peasants. They do keep trying, however, to find weak
sellers. The problem is that weak sellers are more or less randomly located.
Worse: they are likely to hold less eligible land, far out, or on flood plains,
or without good roads and utilities. For strong hands take the best land,
leaving the scraps for the weak. The result is a denial of all those benefits
that rent, by forcing economy of land, would bring. There is waste of
good natural features; of public spending; and of unrealized synergism,
                    Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                   23

  in all its varied aspects. Among other problems, sprawl aggravates the
  disadvantages of smaller businesses, because they need the city, whereas
  giant business substitutes its internal synergism for the market's.

  B. Land Appreciation. We have already seen that land appreciation
   exacerbates the allocative bias resulting from credit discrimination. Taxing
   land meliorates this problem by substituting a tax charge for the discrim-
   inatory interest charge. There is much to add to that.
     Land appreciation receives extraordinarily favorable income tax treat-
   ment. The details of its privileged position warrant a book (6). Briefly,
   they consist in that the landowner can take tax-free cash out of appreciated
   land anytime by banking it (strong hands enjoying lower interest rates in
   this matter, too), while income on the capital gain is not taxed until sale,
   and often not then, sometimes not ever. Taxes if finally paid are at low
   capital-gains rates, carrying costs deductible from ordinary income
      These and related privileges have made land speculation a sovereign tax
   loophole, so much so that increments loom much larger in the thinking of
   many landowners than ordinary taxable income from land use, creating a
   strong llocative bias for holding Clearly some strong medicine is needed
   to counter this bias and abate the resulting over-pricing and hoarding of
   appreciating land Taxation of land is such medicine The income tax as
   presently administered virtually exempts land increments from taxation
    (Gaffney 1969) The prospect of heavy land taxation dashes the hopes for
   such increments, and returns land from hoards to meet the needs of today
      Sometimes the problem is the reverse one coveted increments motivate
   premature building in bad locations and add to sprawl This does not
   come about in the implausible Davenport (1917)-Johnson (1914) pat-
   tern—they alleged that builders deducted land increments from building
   costs, and passed the gain on to buyers' Rather, there are circumstances
   when premature building helps to appropriate some privilege associated
   with land use An early shopping center in an empty area may exert great
L leverage over public spending for roads, drawing them to itself with the
   aid of some political manipulation To secure the resulting land incre-
   ment, investors prematurely invade unripe territory, neglecting riper lands
   nearer it Land taxation would press for early use of the riper land and
   deglamorize the increments from acquisition of green land
      Again, the apprehension of imminent low-density zoning in loosely
   organized suburbs stimulates owners to hasten to sink capital into pre-
   mature high density improvements in order to establish their future grand-
   fatherhood There is a double bias toward sprawl Snob zoning nearer
24        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

in pushes investors outwards; anticipated snob zoning further out, and the
grandfatherhood instinct, pull them outwards. Grandfatherhood in this
case means a monopoly rent attached to land. Anticipated rent taxation
would threaten to ecapture for the public the value of the privilege, and
so weaken the motive to appropriate new ones.
   Today, too many allocation decisions are made under the shadow of im-
pending increments. Visualize the hierarchy of land uses as a series of
concentric circles. Demand for higher uses is not fully satisfied in their
proper cirdes, because of land holdouts there. Unmet demand probes
outwards, casting a diffused "floating value" over outer zones. This float-
ing value raises land prices enough so the outer land is too high priced to
renew in its present use, although still unripe for the higher use. What
is the landowner then to do when his extant buildings get too old to pay
the land rent?
  The socially optimal course is to renew the site in its present lower use.
But the floating value factor discourages that. He is more likely to let
old buildings keep growing old for a while, reserving land for the higher
use. Builders needing land for the lower use are forced out another ring,
casting their floating value over the next lower use, and so on in a series
of shock waves. Result: more sprawl, at every margin of land use. Again,
taxing land rent draws floating value back in, focuses it in its proper areas,
and avoids this travesty of market performance.

C. Recourse to Other Taxes. Not taxing rent means raising necessary tax
revenues by other means. In a small, open economy like the typical Amer-
ican local jurisdiction, these other taxes are almost necessarily shifted
"downwards" to landowners, and so borne indirectly by rent. This is
because capital and labor are mobile among jurisdictions whereas land is
not. So labor and capital will not accept substandard returns in one juris-
diction; but land has no choice. (In this frame of reference it is a good
convention to describe rent as "residual.")
   If all taxes are shifted to rent, what difference does it make what kind
of tax we use? It makes a lot. Taxes shifted into rent get shifted through
reducing the supply of the thing nominally taxed, as landowners take
evasive action to avoid heavily taxed land uses. Loss of net benefits from
the nominal tax base is an "excess burden" from indirect taxation.
   In every land-use decision, taxation biases owners against the more heav-
ily taxed use. If the tax base is anything but rent, this bias leads to lower
intensity of service flow from land and slower replacement of old struc-
hires. Not only are the allocative effects bad, so are the distributive ones.
                     Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                     25

   Taxing land use, and human activity, leads to heavier taxes on the poor,
   who crowd onto land more densely than the rich, and fortifies the effects
   of price discrimination in credit in disabling the poor when they compete
   against the rich for land.
     This reasoning rests on assuming a small open economy as the taxing
   jurisdiction. Many analysts object to assuming that non-land inputs can
   or will flee from taxes when we broaden the analysis to the national level.
   I believe they are largely wrong. Take for example the property tax on
   buildings, and regard it as a national phenomenon.
      From the national view, driving capital across a local line is not to lose
   the capital, as it provides services wherever it goes. It may also be driven
    back by taxes. But investors have other escape routes.
      First, they may move their capital across the international line. Increas-
    lag numbers are, aggravating a serious national balance of payments
    weakness.
        Second, they may escape into public bonds. Taxation of private capital
     makes yields on public issues look better. If public capital needs were
     fixed there would be little drain of capital into public works. But public
     capital needs are greatly magnified by urban sprawl. Urban sprawl in
     turn results partly from taxing buildings, for building taxation lowers the
     optimal intensity of land use.
        Building taxes contribute to sprawl in other ways than by their general
: tendency to reduce density. In recent times, as central cities age, the build-
     lag tax base falls. This forces higher tax rates and poorer services, which
     in turn drives investors away from the central city where they would be
   • welcomed only to be exploited as fiscal surplus generators. Investors then
3; seek hospitable suburbs where new buildings can huddle together, pio-
     tecting each other by their high taxable valuations from becoming the
     victims of fiscal exploitation Thus the general use of buildings as a tax
    base in a metropolitan area tends to sterilize central lands and bias investors
    outward
      Applying the same reasoning on a national scale, the older central cities
  Iof the Northeast especially have made themselves unattractive relative to
    growth areas in the West and South, which can keep tax rates lower
    because their buildings, on the average are newer This contributes to
    "continental sprawl," imposing added social costs of interregional linkage,
 in a manner quite analogous to urban sprawl.
       Another aspect is that building taxes make incorporated municipalities
    with good public facilities look less attractive than they should in compe-
    tition with incorporated areas with no services but lower tax rates. kt is
26         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

not that municipalities should not charge for their services; but that they
should levy charges in some less dumsy way, that does not make marginal
investments submarginal as the building tax does.
   Private utility line costs are equally inflated by sprawl. These are nom-
inally taxed as improvements, but the tax is partly shifted forward under
rate regulation procedures into higher user charges.
   Public works and utility investments are well above average in longevity
and capital intensity. Thus they absorb much capital and tie it up for long
decades before returning it. The interest is paid by taxes and user charges
on the very buildings which compete with the public for capital.
   A third source of elasticity in the supply of investment is the macro-
economic. Investment volume is elastic to the tmarginal efficiency of
capital"—i.e., the investor's rate of return after taxes. An increase of
investment opportunities brings new capital into being by raising real
income and saving.
  Assuming, now, that building taxes are not absorbed by investors in
lower after-tax returns, they serve to lower urban density and so inflate
social capital requirements, frustrate potential urban synergism, etc.
  It is obvious enough why they tend to lower capital intensity on central
lands. They impose an added marginal cost on every increment to capital
intensity of land use, be it of height, lot coverage, quality, or advance of
renewal date. it is less obvious why they let capital move outwards to the
margins of the city. The same reasoning that says they abort marginal
investment on central land would also seem to say they make marginal
land totally submarginal, because marginal land yields no surplus that
could absorb any tax. That is simply the dassic lesson of Ricardo on
"Tithes" (1911, ch. 11). But the lesson is too simple. It overlooks the
human sources of land rent, that is public works and synergism.
  The marginality of land depends on the extension of public works; also
on the population and improvement of neighboring land. As capital is
diverted from central land into public works extensions, peripheral land
previously marginal becomes supramarginal. Investors may therefore
build there and still have a surplus to absorb building taxes. People will
move out—they have to live somewhere. The presence of pioneer settlers
further enhances the rentability of surrounding lands, attracts more capital,
builds a base for further extensions, etc. The urban carpet may unroll for
miles into the countryside this way. Instead of there being diminishing
returns to aggregate national investment of capital, as in both the Marxian
and Keynesian schemes, there are probably increasing returns, thanks to
the highly complementary relations of interdependent individual land im-
                     Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                  27

 provements in growing districts and regions. This synergism is expressed
 and confirmed in growing land values around cities. It affords an escape
 route for the capital that is taxed away from its most productive uses in
 rebuilding central cities.
       The net national results of taxing buildings then are: 1) a reduction
 in national capital via capital flight overseas; 2) a reduction of aggregate
 capital formation via the macro-economic process of reduced investment,
 income, and saving and 3) a reduction of urban density involving great
 diversion of capital into public works; a general inflation of the capital
 requirements of living, characteristic of urban sprawl; and, of course, a
 great increase in aggregate land needs.
    So it does matter how we go about taxing rent. Taxing it directly serves
 the opposite ends: attracts capital from abroad; increases investment, real
 income, and capital formation; and contains urban sprawl.

  D. Logrolling as a Guide to Public Spending. Land rents are partly the
  product of public spending, as we have seen. If the public fails to charge
  landowners for public benefits by taxing rent, every public improvement
  bestows unearned wealth on a few. There are several bad results.
    For one, there is no objective criterion for maximizing social benefits
  in planning public works. Unearned enrichment of a few big speculators
  or old families or farmers is hardly a "social" benefit The door is open
  to pressure and corruption. Indeed, there is hardly any alternative—what
  would be an honest way to give away public money to a privileged few?
     Second, logrolling sets in and leads to over-decentralization. Land-
     owners from every quarter of town compete in city councils for their share
     of unearned wealth. An efficient city calls for neighborhood differentia-
 tion and specialization, with much heavier public spending and higher
 rents in some areas than others. If rent were taxed, winning landowners
1 would compensate losers through the tax mechanism. As it is not taxed,
 winners compensate losers in another coin: more public works. You vote
 for my project and I'll support yours, regardless of merit—it is an old
     familiar tale at every level of government.
     • Third, unearned enrichment discredits wealth and property. Instead of
     being a mark of distinction, a symbol of productivity and service, wealth
     symbolizes predation, dependency, and corruption. Unearned wealth
     makes for hypocrisy and a mockery of efforts to legitimize property and
     rationalize capitalism. Parasitic wealth stigmatizes all wealth. The latent
,is lost between
     senseof civic community and polity, now so frustrated in American cities,
                   the avarice of some and the disgust of others. Not to tax
1.
    28         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

    rent, therefore, is to alienate those outside a small circle, and lose a valuable
    resource of community spirit

    E. Market Impetfections. Because of fixed location and supply of land,
    the discipline of competition breaks down easily in the land market.
    Chamberlin (1933), Ise (1940), Hotelling (1929), Hoover (1937) and
    others have theorized about monopoly elements in urban rent, based on
    spatial differentiation of sellers of services from land. Curiously, no one
    has done anything comparable on the much more serious problem of land
    assembly. Here is bilateral monopoly, secrecy, holdout power, preemption,
    hoarding, and every nightmare imaginable in trying to make competition
    work.
      The response of land buyers to anticipated assembly problems is, as one
    might expect, to hoard land for future expansion. This is not self-correct-
    ing but self-reinforcing. Buttressed as it is by all the favors to land
    appreciation noted above, it is a formidable factor.
      In a well-oiled market there is pooling of reserves, greatly deflating
    aggregate needs. In the land market there is little pooling. Everyone
    must have his own. It is a pattern of vertical integration of firms, with
    corresponding disintegration of the market pool of land reserves. Indus-
    tries hold great reserves, of course Homeowners do too— it is nice to
    have an extra side yard for a possible future wing, and additions to homes
    are in fact common Shopping centers take more land than they really
    need for parking, for future additions; and if they can sterilize potentially
    competitive locations by preempting a few key parcels, why not? Public
    buyers enter to legitimize the whole process, and few private buyers can
4   match the hoarding neurosis ("foresight") of park commissions and school
    boards
        Another problem is that of the landowners' waiting for greater certainty
    The certainty is to be bestowed by his neighbors when they commit them-
     selves to a use The waiter, however, is not producing certainty by waiting
     He imposes uncertainty on his neighbors by not committing himself The
     stalemate that sometimes results is far from soaally optimal Something
     like this has been popularized recently under the name "The Prisoners'
4    Dilemma," and turned into a game
        In such a market, a powerful lubricant is essential if there is to be any
     semblance of an optimal competitive outcome Taxing rent serves the
     function, ever so much better than games between economists pretending
     they are prisoners It loosens everyone's hold on land, especially land
     with monopoly potential (and hence higher assessed value) Releasing



V
                    Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                    29

    land to commerce is also self-reinforcing, this time constructively. When
    land ownership turns over faster and easier, everyone's hoarding propensity
    relaxes. As to the waiting and certainty problem, synchronized assessment
    increments over whole neighborhoods give the signal that lets every land-
    owner know the time is nigh, and lets each one avoid narrow self-suffi-
    ciency and orient his improvement to the immediate prospect of a total
    interdependent community, complete with Yellow Pages, rising around
    him.
                                         II
                               HOW TO TAX RENT
    Wi SAW EARLIER that many local taxes are shifted to rent, and are indirect
    taxes on rent. So the trick for public policy is not just to tax rent, it is
    to tx it in such a manner as to exploit the fact that rent may be taxed
    with benefit rather than damage to economic functions.

    A. Fiscal Leverage vs. Fiscal Profit Sharing. The benefits spring, to re-
    peat, from imposing a regular cash cost on the landholder, a charge that
    discourages his ever retaining land in uses whose service flows fail to cover
    it. To this, many have objected that it is too harsh; that land users prefer
    risk sharing and profit sharing to leverage. They can point to some volun-
    tary contracts between private lessor and lessee where rent is a share of
    profit, or of gross. One could point, on the other hand, to ordinary mort-
    gage terms, with debt service in excess of land rent, which apply more
    leverage than mere cash rent would. But there are reasons why govern-
    ment should apply more leverage than a private landlord does to his lessees
      One, government possesses a power to allow for exogenous risks, a
    power not generally available to private landowner lessors, by its assess-
    ment of land That is if, through no fault of a landowner, land on which
    he had built should suffer a neighborhood decline, a government taxing
    rent would share the loss by lowering his land assessment If the fault
were his, on the other hand, he would suffer it all, for there would be no
  general decline of neighborhood values Likewise, he would reap all the
    gain from his superior management
- farm rent payments to some index of market changes For urban land,
      There are a few instances of private contracts tying interest or wage or

    however, there is no device in private contract that ties payment to an an-
    nual assessment hence recourse to less perfect devices Government
    alone is in a position to supply maximum incentive leverage while still
    sharing exogenous risk. Sharing the latter, it can reasonably be much
    firmer about the former



I
    30        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

-
      Two, government as representative of the whole community is interested
    in fostering cumulative spillover benefits from private investments. It
    wants private investors to complement its public works with matching
    private works, contining urban sprawl by meeting demand from good
    central land. It wants to synchronize interlocking private investments and
    minimize mutual uncertainty in developing areas. It wants to foster dense
    population around its retail centers, to support them; and retail centers
    for its population, to serve them and help pay taxes. It wants to unfreeze
    the whole land market, discourage hoarding, and prevent all the soda!
    wastes of blocking competition.
       Three, private risk-sharing contracts presuppose a large guaranteed
    lessee investment in a building. There is the leverage. Government can
    not get involved in everyone's private business like that, telling landowhers
    when to build and how much they must invest. By charging a regular
    rent tax, regardless, it assures that landowners will raise buildings in good
    season.
       A complicating question in rent taxation has always been the treatment
    of increments to value; and the choice of capital value or current income
    (realized or "notional") as the tax base.
      As to the first, taxation of land value increments obviously lacks the
    good incentive effects of taxing rent. It is avoidable by not selling, and
    greatly diluted by deferring sale. It puts a hurdle in the way of sale by
    investor to builder, and• then applies no leverage to the buyer.
       Capital value as a tax base has been often criticized as overtaxing rising
    land whose capital value has risen out of proportion to current cash income.
    Heilbrun (1966, pp. 123—27) has demolished this argument as it deserves
    (7). The income from rising land indudes appreciation, at the time it
    accrues. To get at this income, without waiting for sale, a simple tax on
    capital value suffices (8). To tax current cash income in the lower use is
    to miss out altogether on taxing the increment. To tax capital value is to
    have an increment tax, but one that is not diluted by deferral until sale,
    and does not discourage timely.ownership turnover.

    B. Rent, Spiiovers, and Congestion of Open Facilities. There are two
    brakes on increasing returns from urban synergism: internal congestion;
    and external markets. Here we treat the first.
      Those who fear congestion of open common space and facilities—streets,
    schools, parks, air and water—rank high among people who oppose letting
    rent serve its economic function of forcing land to the best use. They
    regard congestion of common open space as an external diseconomy fmm
                Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                    31

use of private land: where I have stressed synergistic gains, they see net
losses. They favor taxes on actively using, rather than passively holding
land, interpreting user taxes on landowners as user charges for open com-
mon land and facilities. They favor compulsory land-consumption via
low-density zoning, the better to insulate man from his neighbor, and
above all to avoid letting immigrants in cheap housing dilute the school
tax base. They do not share the Horace Mann philosophy of paying a
social dividend to the poor man's children by taxing the rich man's land
for public schools.
   There is no question of the premise that congestion and pollution are
bad. What to do about it is something else again.
   One must concede something to each of the points, but not very much,
for they are based on a number of confusions.
   Confusion number 1 is not to hold population constant in the analysis.
That is, intensive land use is implicitly blamed for the birthrate. Land
economics takes population as given. Its problem is how to deploy people,
not to sterilize them. Thus, intensive land use near downtown does not
in itself increase street loads. Rather, it lets a given number of people
get downtown by walking or riding buses a few blocks rather than driving
a few miles and parking all day. Which arrangement imposes less burden
on streets, air, and open space? Which puts more sprawl between the
city and recreation in the open country?
   True, the more efficient city then attracts immigrants. But these bring
added economies of urban scale. The point of urban planning is to
achieve a maximum of such positive interdependencies with a minimum of
negative frictions like congestion. To that end, accommodate efficiently
each given increment of people, and welcome the next. Those who agree
with William H. Whyte that "open space is not merely the absence of
something bad; it is a positive good" will be pleased to note that the im-
migrants to these efficient cities cannot avoid leaving great realms of empty
open space behind them, which should greatly shorten the Audubon So-
ciety's list of threatened rare species.
   Confusion number 2 is to equate intensity of private land use with con-
gestion of common space. In fact, private buildings transport people ver-
tically, substituting elevators for horizontal street movement. If we cut
off the marginal twentieth story of an apartment or office, and relocate the
floor space ten miles out at the other margin of the city (the horizontal
one), we would throw a great new load on ten miles of common streets.
This is no way to decongest- them.
  Intensive private land use does not mean an absence of park land. Pop.
32          The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

ulation around parks justifies the public investment in space, in landscap-
ing and furnishing it. Putting private land to work meeting the legitimate
space demand for homes, work, and market relieves the pressure to invade
park land. Central' city park sites become dearer, it is true. But if urban
sprawl were contained by intensive central development, fringe lands now
eyed by subdividers would revert to low values and open recreational use.
  Confusion number 3 is to overlook the factor of age and quality of
buildings. Taxes on buildings and low-density zoning are. thought to
screen out marginal buildings and their inhabitants. But they screen in
buildings that become marginal by virtue of senility.
  Confusion number 4 is to conceive of congestion in short run terms.
An overloaded sewer, for example, is a sign of short run increasing costs,
but not long run. It is a signal to replace the mains with larger ones,
achieving in the process great economies of scale. Car-choked streets man-
ifest increasing social cost of cars, but not of transport. They are a signal
to tax cars and promote mass transit, again achieving economies of scale.
Crowded schools do not reflect overpopulation but inadequate schools, and
failure to take advantage of Conant's Law of increasing returns to scale
of schooL
   There is such a thing as true congestion. There comes a scale of city
so large and central density so high that an absolute space limit is ap-
proached. The "linkage sector" of the city (transport and utilities) moves
into the stage of long run increasing costs. In this extremity the optimal
solution is not to abandon the principle of taxing rent, but to extend it to
the linkage sector, which now yields rents, too. In this case the object of
the charge is to limit use and space-consumption in the linkage sector, and
so it should take the form of a user charge.
  Use of unfenced open space without tenure protection is temporary
tenure of the space. So a "use" tax on open space is analogous to a flat
tax on the rent of land in formal private tenure. It is not analogous to a
tax on the use of private land, but exactly the reverse. To tax the use of
private land is to untax the non-use of it. This lets owners hold the space
without charge, which is analogous to letting them "use" public space free.
  The optimal user. charge would be selective, hitting and screening out
congesting and polluting uses, reserving limited downtown street space for
for higher and less congesting uses. With such a concept in hand, and
someone like Professor William Vickrey or James Nelson to administer it,
there might indeed be no limit on the optimal size of a city. May we be
so lucky as to find out soon! Meantime we already observe progress in
this direction on many fronts, from parking meters to pollution police.
                      Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy                   33

        Confusion number 5 would be to think of school congestion as a space
     problem. It is a problem of finance and distributi'e equity. The solution,
     I am sure, is to support schools in part by state or federal aids based on
     population or attendance. Redistributing wealth and paying social divi-
     dends are not functions we can realistically expect of local government in a
     mobile age.

     C. Intergovernmental Relations. The second brake on increasing returns
     from urban synergism is the external market. Many cities fear growth
     because they think their market is limited.
       If a private firm reasoned that way, economists would identify it as a
     monopoly and evaluate the attitude accordingly. To cities we give more
     rope: they represent the public. But what "public?" Only the land-
     owners of the city. They are all too happy to exploit other "publics" in the
     old Hanseatic tradition documented by Schmoller (1884).
        Central government represents the larger public. Its interest is to apply
     more positive leverage to cities than they might apply to themselves, to
     counter any monopoly restriction or stodginess. One such kind of leverage
     I have already mentioned, the payment of school subventions based on
     population. Legislative reapportionment based on population affords
     another growth motive, praises be to Baker vs. Carr.
        A third kind might be a state tax on rent, as now proposed in Oregon
     by Dean Lindholm. State government finances many of the public works
     that generate urban rent. It has a legitimate interest in being recompensed.
     It stands toward cities much as they stand toward private individual land-
     owners. The state spends to give the city opportunities. Many cities
     fail to respond with spending on local feeders and network lines to match
     the state's trunks. The state needs to apply tax leverage.
        It has the institutional power. State taxation of real estate is not dead,
     it is alive and well in Nebraska, and merely quiescent in other states.
     Anglo-Saxon-Norman law makes no bones about the ultimate underlying
     eminent domain of the state over all land. Some creative economist needs
     to propose a specific formula for sharing rents between state and city. The
     important thing is the general purpose: collect state-created rents to prompt
     cities to spend to generate more rents. In sharing these new rents between
     state and city, both can afford to be generous. Synergism yields a corn-
:
T
     fortable surplus for the city. As for the state's tax base, Adam Smith noted
     196 years ago that the "Commerce of the Towns Contributed to the mi-
     provement of the Country" (1776, Book III, ch. 4).
;.      Thestatehasthemoralauthoritytotaxrent. Inthepast,manypeople
                                                                                              I


34           The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

shied away from 'conflscatory" taxation. But now that question is obso-
lete. We already have confiscatory taxation. The only question is what
shall we confiscate? fs it land that belongs to the state, or people? That
is the alternative. We have gone a long way towards socializing people
in this century. We draft young men and we tax human talent, in Toyn-
bee's words, as though the talented ones had committed some pre-natal
crime against humanity; and we take a regressive payroll tax from every
worker. Every bit of rent we confiscate now lets us un-confiscate that
much of ourselves as huimin beings.
Resource: for the Future, Inc.
Washington, D.C. 20036


     1. Algebraically, P =

        Carrying cost    (i + t)P = (i + t)        =a
     For derivation and elaboration see Mason Gaffney (1962).
    2. A building of 40-year life, and initial cost of 1, depreciates in a straight line at
21/2 per cent yearly. Mean capital investment over life is 1/2. Interest at 1 per cent
on is 2 '/ per cent.
    For more precision one would elaborate from empirical data on depreciation patterns
on the following lines. Mean yearly depreciation is I/L, where L is life. The level cash
or service flow of an asset whose present value is one is —        , where I is interest
                                                                (11+ •)
rate. The share of this level flow that is depreciation is:
                                      1
                                     L        = 1_(1+iyL
                                 ______              Li
                                 l_(l+i)L
IfL=4Oandi=.05,theshareis"14
                     40 x .01
                              .43.
     If the service flow is not level but declining (the normal pattern) then the deprecia-
tion share is larger.
    3 For an elaboration of these points see Mason Gaffney (1961)
    4. For example, if capital turns in 4 years, added yearly volume is 214+14 =304.
    S. A particularly conspicuous landowner to receive this advice from many prominent
economists is the U.S. Government. Economists who advise citing public works on
public lands so as to maximize the "Benefit: Cost Ratio" usually assign no cost to the
public land, even though it may be a scarce and valuable damsite. Thus they are advising
against intensity great enough to equate marginal product and marginal cost of non-land
inputs. The practical error is often compensated by understating non-land costs, especially
interest. But the analytical error is no less glaring and mischievous in its overall con-
fusing effect on the minds of economists.
   6. An effort to sum them up has been made by Mason Gaffney (1969, 1967b).
   7. For mathematical treatments see Gaffney (1967b, pp. 308—13 and 321—22) and
(1969).
   8. The tax is a fixed percentage of the capital value. So, in equilibrium, is the yearly
appreciation. Therefore the tax is a fixed percentage of the appreciation.
