  "CHANGES IN LAND POLICY:
  HOW FUNDAMENTAL ARE THEY"




             by

       MASON GAFFNEY




A paper presented to the Western
Agricultural Economics Association
Fort Collins, Colorado, July 20, 1976
I. FROM GROWTH TO EXCLUSION: A FUNDAMENTAL TIPPING OF
    THE SCALES.


      The last 25 years have witnessed a fundamental change
in state and local land policy, reflecting a revolutionary
change in attitudes towards immigration and growth. Local
governments used to compete to attract people, now it seems
to exclude them   In the battle of boosters versus knockers,
the knockers have won going away.
      We have had low density policies with us always, but
in the past they were different. King George III, for example,
wanted to reserve the lands west of the Appalachian crest
for the Indians, but he really didn't care about preserving
their low density way of life. His idea was to keep English
colonists in the East and under better control. Alexander
Hamilton soon revived the same idea after the revolution
and his expressed motive was to keep cheap labor in the east.
In those days people wanted to have cheap labor around.
George III's containment policies lost out, as you know,
to the revolutionaries and Hamilton's containment policies
lost out to the Jeffersonians. Since then there have been
successive waves of both containment and expansion forces
at work. The expansionists have always won out more than
they lost —— until now. But our generation has seen the
greatest proliferation of exclusionary selective and containing
land policies ever to exist in North America. We see this
in many ways and aspects which I will itemize.


      A Philosophical and Linguistic
      Consider the evolution of the word tspeculatorfl as a
pejorative.   A speculator used to mean someone who withheld
land from use, waiting for the rise. Now it means someone
who would develop it for a higher use, as often as not.
                          —2—


Twenty years ago I wrote a dissertation on the subject of
land speculation and after scanning the literature on the
subject, had to conclude that the only consistent meaning
of speculator is a land owner whom you don't like. In the
old days people didn't like owners who withheld lands, so
they called them speculators   Today they don't like owners
who develop land.
      Witness the evolution of arguments made to justify the
private collection of rent, (many of you may never get into
such discussions, but at various times it becomes a hot
subject). Defenders of the private collection of rent used
to say that socializing rent would remove incentive to put
land to the best use; now, however, the argument most
commonly heard against taxing land values is the opposite,
namely that it creates too much incentive to put land to
its best use. This indeed is what preferential assessment
of farm land is all about, is it not?
      Accordingly, if we read carefully the so called anti—
speculation laws as for instance, in the State of Vermont or
the Province of Ontario, we note that they are punitive and.
anti-developmental in their spirit and their impact.
      In passing, note that the people are right who argue
that taxes on land values tend to push land into a higher
use. This is sometimes overlooked by people who have their
eyes fixed on a lower use and see heavy fixed charges on
land driving out the lower use. Such charges, whether they
be privately collected rent or publicly collected taxes, serve
the function of driving out lower uses in order to reallocate
the land to higher uses. This point is sometimes missed even
by economists who should know better. Some of these in seeking
to explain the decay of :central cities have alleged that it was
high rents that drove industry away. In general that does not
make much sense. It is somewhat akin to the stOry of the man
who said, "Let'.s all go to Smitty's for dinner" and his friend
replied, "No one goes to Smitty's anymore, its too crowded."
                           —3—


      B. Provincial and State Zoning and Exclusion
     Municipalities of exclusionary bent have been around
a long time. The exclusionary minded state and province
are something new. Some states, to be sure —— New York and
Massachusetts come to mind —— have made gestures towards
pze-empting the zoning power of local governments when this
was used in an excessively exclusionary way. The stronger
movement, however, has been towards anti—growth policies
by states and provinces. Florida, Oregon and Vermont are
conspicuous examples.
      In Canada, British Columbia is an outstanding example,
one that I have had a chance to observe more closely, so I
will discuss it. The exclusionary policy of British Columbia
has to do with public policy discouraging the conversion of
farmland to urban uses. The policy is above and beyond mere
preferential assessment of farmland, to be treated later.
British Columbia has that too, and has had for many years.
The newer device is exclusive agricultural zoning, imposed
by the province, on a province—wide basis. It is administered
by a provincial commission, the B. C. Land Commission, from
the top down. The Commission classifies land as agricultural
and places it in what is called the Agricultural Land Reserve
or more familiarly the A.L.R. By this straightforward device,
a great deal of land with speculative potential has been
effectively withdrawn from consideration for urbanization
in the immediate future.
      The Land Commission Act enjoys fairly strong support.
It originated in 1972—73 when the New Democratic Party first
came to power, over loud protests. It was unusual ir at least
two respects. One was its wide coverage, as it is province—
wide. The other was the decision to allow no compensation
for the loss of development rights. Actually, as one thinks
about it, the imposition of low density zoning is not normally
                           —4--


accompanied by compensation, so this is not as unusual as
its critics may have made it out to be. At any rate in
the 1975 election campaign, the leader of the New Democratic
Party, Premier David Barrett, seemed to sense that the Land
Commission Act was among his more popular measures and
campaigned on it as a major achievement.. He may have been
wrong for he did lose the election resoundingly, but on
the other hand, the newly triumphant Social Credit Party
(or Socreds) did not indicate a disposition to repeal it
and so far they haven't. It would appear to have a measure
of bipartisan support.
      At the same time, one must observe that a high degree
of uncertainty prevails about the future of this A.L.R. Land
which is in it and zoned exclusively agricultural is still
being bought and sold at developmental prices. It seems that
the market does not altogether believe that this zoning will
hold.
        Meantime, A.L.R. zoning did succeed in stopping the
development of further sprawl. It also forced up urban
real estate priäes to incredibly high levls. These high
values with the pressure which they brought towards inten-
sive development might have stimulated infilling and redevel-
opment of the urban areas — recall the story of Smitty's
restaurant. But, a decentralist campaign was launched against
 further development of the central cities in the lower
mainland particularly, and there was a strengthening atthe
local level of a variety of exclusionary devices, such as impost
 fees charged for new developments. It was not merely sprawl
 that was made more difficult, it was building and development
 inall areas.
        The result presented the anomaly of a government which
sometimes called itself "Socialist" — the New Democrats are
an arnalgamof Socialists and New World Populists and like
                           —5—


most political parties present a mixed and sometimes
confusing personality — a Socialist government creating
an artificial scarcity of land choking off building and
raising property values and rents to the great distress
of the landless laboring classes.
     Who am I to hold a political party to a standard of
perfection?   Even God required six days to create heaven
and earth beginning from primordial chaos and that is a
pretty good description of the urban sprawl that pre—existed
1972   The policy did succeed in containing further sprawl
— well, sort of, but you remember the old joke that ends
"and the politician proudly said, but who created chaos."
The actual location of A L R lands was not based on con-
taining sprawl, except incidentally Rather it was based
on a Canada Land Inventory classification of agricultural
land, a classification conducted by agriculturally oriented
soilsmen without much regard for urban alternatives   Thus,
good farmland near in, whose best use might be urban cannot
be urbanized, while bad farmland, far out, may be, even though
it shouldn't be Nothing whatever has been done about the
fundamental problem of utility rate structures, so that
utilities can and must still run their lines anywhere anyone
chooses to settle and charge common province—wide rates. And
so we still get sprawl.

      Of course there is nothing in this kind of legislation
either, to clean up old sprawl or encourage infilling. On
the contrary, it gives grandfather—clause monopoly protection
to ancient and honorable sprawl and assures its perpetuation.
Worst of all, by creating the il1uson that something con-
structive is being done, it pre—empts the field and discour-
ages other actions that might be more effective.
                            —6—

       On an international basis, the policy has also
 encouraged a great deal of sprawl from British Columbia
spilling over to the State of Washington, where land is
 much more available.
       As a land planning device therefore, the A.L.R.
does not get the highest mark     It is not, in that sense,
 a "fundamental'change, but it is successful and it is
 fundamental in another sense. That is, it has been suc-
 cessful in retarding the growth of population.
       Was this just stumbling and bumbling by a green raw
cabinet as alleged? In my opinion, people generally get
what they really want, regardless of what they say they
want. Exclusive agricultural zoning in rural British
 Columbia coupled with low density zoning and heavy impost
 fees in urban British Columbia have worked together and
 quite consistently to slow down immigration. This is
 the point of consistency, Ergo, this is probably what
 was really wanted.
       I've lived in many places and I've lived in few or
 none where people didn't think they had something very
 special and the world would flood in and overwhelm them if
 you gave it half a chance. But when you say this to
 people in British Columbia, hoping thereby to encourage
 a little objectivity by getting them to laugh at themselves,
 the answer is "Yes, but British Columbia is different, here
 it's really true." "Socialism" in British Columbia was a
 device to use the power of government for the purpose of
 excluding immigrants and increasing the value of property.
       I've recently been working o;er somefiqures from the
 B C Assessment Authority which has placed a 100% market
 value on all the taxable real estate in British Columbia.
 In the Vancouver Assessment Area (which means basically,
                          —7—


the City of Vancouver) total value of land alone, without
buildings i-S1O.7 billion dollars. The mean value per
parcel is 115 thousand dollars. The top ten per cent of
the owners measured by value, own 73% of the total value
of land. The top one per cent own 62%. As a ballpark
estimate, the value of land in Vancouver doubled from
1972-1975. It would be hard to argue that a policy that
contributed to the doubling of value of an asset is
closely held and so large in relation to the government's
welfare budget and other equalizing devices, was a step
in the direction of the egalitarian ideals sometimes
associated with the word socialism.
      In fairness, one must record that the members of the
Land Commission vigorously deny that their zoning activities
had anything to do with this increase in urban values,
which they believe would have occurred anyway. I don't
know anyone else who agrees with them — certainly I do not,
but no doubt other factors were involved as well, and we
will never know just how much of the increase they were
responsible for.
      A secondary objective of the legislation was to punish
evil men called land speculators. They were evil because
they made money — or were they? When we analyze it, the
punitive spirit has not been directed at making money as
such, for some five billion dollars has been made by the
doubling of land'values in Vancouver, without that being
called evil. No, the animus was directed against the evil
of intensifying the use of land and increasing the capacity
of British Columbia to absorb immigrants. This is the
unpardonable sin.
      It is not my intention to seem sarcastic or critical.
As will come out later, the province may have legitimate
reasons for wanting to exclude people. My purpose rather, is
simply to brush aside the cloak of conventional cant and
hypocrisy to get a handle on what was really done and for
                            —8—

what reason. After that, we can better come to grips
with it.


       C. Preferential Assessment of Farmland
       More common than exclusive agricultural zoning is
 the preferential assessment of farmland. The Maryland
 legislature started it back in 1956 and doggedly pushed
 it through in spite of vetoes by Govenor McKeldin and a
 declaration of unconstitutionality by the Maryland
 Supreme Court. Promirient among the proponents was one
 Spiro Agnew and I am tempted to think of this as his
 contribution to American culture, but he was not alone,
 for California came along in 1957 and so did several
 other states. I, false prophet that I was, confidently
 said at the time it wouldn't fly. My exact words were
 to the effect that anything that cannot bear analysis
 will do better under the table than over it. This was
 in reference to the fact that preferential assessment
 of farmland had been occurring under the table for many years
 before these laws were passed and indeed, the laws were
 only necessary becauseof the assessment reforms which
• were beginning to undermind the de facto underassessment
 of farmland which had long being practiced. Preferential
 assessment of farmland spread from state to state and has
 enjoyed wide popular support. British Columbia joined the
 parade sometime ago.
       Preferential assessment is a pretty fundamental change
 in the philosophy of land taxation. It makes the part of the
 property tax that falls on land a penalty tax on growth.
 For example, land near Vancouver which is farmed is assessed
 at 3 or 4 per cent of its market välué compared to50 per cent
 which is the normal assessment ratio. That means it's being
 assessed at 6 to 8 per cent of what it should be. Now let
 someone convert the use from agricultural to commercial or
 residential and Socko! The land assessment rises 10 or 20
 times. The effect of course is to slow down the conversion
                          —9-.



of land to more intensive uses. As I indicated before, I
think people usually get what they really want, and I am
inclined to think that is the objective. Other alleged
reasons are probably just so much noise, however, we will
consider them in the next section.

      D. Other
      There are numerous other devices for stopping growth
and excluding immigrants A moratorium on sewer construction
can by very effective, as the Washinton Sanitary and Sewer
Commission has demonstrated over the last four years.
Impost fees •arean effective device as British Columbia has
shown. Indeed, almost any sovereign power which has been
delegated to a local government can be used in an exclu-
sionary way and many of them are. Rather than catalogue
them all, let us Just note that they are numerous and move on

II. REASONS FOR THE REVERSAL OF ATTITUDES
      Dozens of reasons are advanced why there is a growing
hostility towards immigration and population growth Only
a few of these hold water, but they hold alt. The ones.
that make sense are primarily environmental and fiscal.



      A. Environmental Reasons.
      People have always valued their environment and resisted
invasions of it. The sheepman and the cattleman didn't like
each other and the cattleman didntt like the sodbusters and
the wheatfarmers didn't like the. irrigators. Yet, the attet
toforce exclusionary policies lost out. What now, has
changed? Or is all this environmental talk just hypocrisy,
hatred of man masquerading as love of nature, as I once
thought?
                          — 10 —



         1.  Higher per capita wealth and income is
certainly a factor. Cleanliness is next to affluence,
more affluent people can afford to sacrifice profit for
amenities. It has always been the higher income suburbs
that zoned out commerce and industry while the blue collar
suburbs compete, to attract them. Now we simply. have more
high income suburbs

         2. An enormous change which has not received
nearly the weight it is due, is the technological multiplier
of personal offensiveness. Modern capital-intensive recre-
ational technology particularly has multiplied by an enormous
factor what we may call the "offensiveness—efficiency" of
normal human behavior. When we look at the evolution of
technology in this light the only kind of personal offensive-
ness that technology has abated much in the last thirty or
forty years is body odor, replacing it with stale tobacco
smoke. As to other factors, I'm reminded of the parent
whose juvenile delinquent son was sent on a trip around the
world. A friend inquired, "Will travel improve his behavior?."
"No," said the parent, "but it will spread it over   wider
territory."
      People don't need much space for the true pleasures
of life: reading, writing, walking, swimming, hiking,
gardening, jogging, cycling, conversing and so on. What
truly require inordinate areas are motoring, golfing,
hunting, flying, skiing, all—terrain vehicles (shudder),
snow—mobiles, motorcycles, rock and roll bands with p a
systems, portable radios, power mowers, noise making of all
kinds   Equally demanding of space, although less numerous,
are those who demand huge wilderness areas with few people
in them to get away from the personal offensiveness of the
technologically efficient polluters.
                          — 11 —



      A homesite on a noisy street drops in value and
cannot qualify for mortgage loans. A house on a quiet
cul—de—sac commands a large premium. Everyone hopes that
his neighbours or the police will take care of these
matters and few people like to talk about it, much less
do anything about it, but the market betrays the evidence.
People really are bugged not so much by other people, but
by the modern machines which magnify their thoughtlessness
or, in the case of disturbed males of a certain age,
undoubtedly their intentional offensiveness. Things that
we used to be able just to laugh about or gossip about
have become major economic   factors.


         3. There is a decline of traditional social controls
with a corresponding rise of irresponsible behavior. The
phenomenon is obvious to one and all. There are solutions,
but they are generally labor—intensive solutions which involve
policing and counselling and the development and support of
local authority figures, like clergymen and teachers. Anything
labor—intensive has gone out of style in the last generation.
The trendy thing has been to substitute land and capital for
labor in almost all circumstances. In terms of social control
that means to arrange land settlement patterns in such a way
as to eliminate problems by neighbourhood segregation and
regional segregation. Keep the pests out of our neighborhood
and then out of our state and our country. All this involves
exclusionary policies and an enormous increased consumption
of land and the capital necessary to deve1op land at low
density.
                           — 12 —




      B. Fiscal Causes
         I. Rising expectations for public services.
Immigrants to a neighborhood, city or state are no longer
as a rule, aliens from Europe or Asia. They are native
citizens from way back, they have high standards in terms
 of public services, frequently higher than those of old
settlers. They are likely to be sold on the value of gen-
erous public support of education. Lower income people
who used to drop out of school early now demand much, much
more schooling than ever before even up to the junior college
level. Marion Clawson and Harvey Perloff in their book,
Modernizing Urban Land Policy, said on page 224 that con-
sistency with the reforms of the Warren Court called for
equal opportunity in access to land, for housing particularly.
So they saw coming a decline in exclusionary policies. With
great respect for the authors and a sharing of their ideals,
I suggest a more pessimistic interpretation. Exclusionary
land policy can be used to substitute for other kinds of
discrimination and is so used. The fact that newcomers
can vote, •can claim all kinds of legal rights and public
services, and make it stick, increases the motivation of
old settlers to keep new settlers out. Human experience is
not marked always by consistency, but by compensatory devices.

         2. High federal personal taxes. The federal
Treasury now relates to individuals as their net exploiter.
Alfred Marshall distinguished what he called onerous from
beneficial taxes. Onerous taxes were those in excess of
public benefits received, while beneficial taxes were matched
by equal public benefits (I don't know why he didn't have
a third class of taxes which were less than public benefits
received, but you can draw your own conclusions about that).
                           — 13 —



      When persons move into a region, a big share of their
income goes off to Washington or Ottawa. After the Feds have
extracted the cream, of course, this reduces what the traffic
will bear for local taxes.
      Of course, the federal Treasury returns subsidies to
localities. Note however, these do not go to individuals
as such, but to local governments as such. Thus local
governments get revenues without necessarily having people.
The feds are inclined to grant subventions for capital—
intensive things: sewers (that's where most of that so-calLed
pollution control money goes), water supply in part, highways,
hospitals, suburban housing. All local public works, of ccrse
are subsidized by the federal exemption of the income of
state and local bonds from taxation in the United States.
Thus the feds help the locals bear the high capital costs
of low density sprawl.
      Most of these capital—intensive facilities render
"services to property and not to people." A great point is
made currently that property taxes should not pay for
services to people, but only services to property. The fact
is, on a large scale, people pay for services to property
via the federal budget, but little is said about this.
Ironically, it is considered "liberal" and egalitarian to
set up fiscal matters in this way.
      If I were a landless orphan, blinking my eyes at the
wonders of this world set up by others, for others, I would
wonder at the justice of a system which levied a payroll ax
on whatever I earn, and income tax on my salary, in order
to make capital grants to municipalities which borrow the
sovereign power of the state to zone land in such a way
as to prevent my living there. I would wonder at the values
of the people who said that I was a net fiscal liability
who was not carrying my weight. Be that as it may, that
                         — 14 —



is the way local governments do regard the immigration of
landless orphans by and large and the result is a growth
of exclusionary local policies.
      Compare the present fiscal situation with that
existing just after World War II. At that time in the
United States there was the G. I. bill. A veteran moving
into a locality received in addition to the gratitude of
his new neighbors for services rendered, a substantial
federal subsidy which attached to him as an individual.
He could carry it around from place to place, he could get
loans for housing and tuition for education. In addition
of course, he was about to become a regular tax payer and
would not be producing school children for a few years at
least. Immigrants under that arrangement were much easier
to accept than they are under present arrangements.

      C. Federal Subsidies to Urban Sprawl
      We have had a generation of subsidies to housing for
the lower—middle class, we have apartments being built for
tax shelters, we have erormous federal subsidieg for highways.
All of this has made housing expansive and intrusive. It
has come to saturate the absorptive capacity and the tolerance
of local governments in a way that probably never occurred
before.


      D. Increased Suburbanization and Balkanization
      Owing to the proliferation of suburbs and the growth
of each one, metropolitan decisions are now divided into
fractions. Everyone may recognize that there are advantages
to urban scale, but everyone wants the advantages without
the disadvantages and has a chance to get them. The suburbs
borrow their scale from the central city to which they have
occasional access when needed. No one wants the dirt and the
                          — 15 —




garbage, and no one gets the exclusive benefit from creating
economies of urban scale. Suburbs easily fall for the fallacy
of composition: if low density is good for us, it is good
for everybody.                              -




      E   Increasing cross—subsidy of low density
settlers by high density settlers
      The urban world is increasingly dependent on public
utilities   Access to land is no longer enough, the land
has to be sewered and watered. It must have telephone
service, power lines, probably natural gas and so on  In
low density areas the volume of service per mile of line
is much lower than high density areas and the costs in low
density correspondingly higher. And yet the rates charged
are usually uniform, in fact, they frequently favor the
low density areas, because of quantity discounts based
on the volume per meter.
      Since the high density areas subsidize the low density
areas, the natural thing is to become a low density area if
you can. This factor undoubtedly increases the attractive-
ness of exclusionary policies.
      At the same time, this factor makes central cities
unwilling to let low density suburbs latch onto them. This
is-quite a reversal from the roaring twenties, when cities
were so anxious to grow they carried all sorts of capital
costs for land developers. But now, without quite knowing
—why, central cities are getting the feeling they they have
been had and the result is a spasm, not always rational,
of anti-growthmanship.
                           —16



       This leaves us then with four basic causes for the
 growth of exclusionary policies. Environmental, fiscal,
-particularistic and responsive to the incentive created by.
cross—subsidies.


       Now let's take a look at some other reaso's h:c :
believe do not bear analysis or carry so much weight.

       A. Reduced regional rivalry for representation
based on population.
       History records several races for regional doxri.imarice
in the legislature by attracting population. Has this
motive disappeared? On the contrary, reapportionment now
occurs faster than it used to and the government passes
out more largesse than it used to. In fact, this may
prove the undoing of the exclusionary movement. •-             ----
       B. The population control movement.
       To relate this to exclusionary zoning is pure
romancing.   Exclusion is nat the route to zero population.
It is a zero-sumgame. Here we are back at the fallacy
 of composition, or over—generalizing from sub—systers.
 There really are people who talk as though if you reduce
 the density on my block you will reduce it everywhere. There
• are also people who say that if we keep apprentices out of
my union local and raise my wages we will raisewages érery—
where   If you think about it, excluding people fror r lDc
must raise density everywhere else, or at least- somewhere
else.
        In   terms Of V solving the problem of population pressure
on the earth, exclusionary policies are very expensive. All
 the gains of exclusion are offset by losses elsewhere, but
 all the losses are real losses. These losses (or costs) are
 the enormous capital and resources requirements of low
density settlement.
                           17 —



         C.The alleged reduced influence of land developers
on local governments.
         There may indeed be some increase in local democracy,
but the influence of big land owners is not dead. It is
alive and well under the rock and is merely exerted in a
different way. Land controls are now used to hold down
land assessment and taxes until that time when the collect-
ivity of land owners is ready to sell out to higher density
users.


         D. Aid to help poor small farmers.
         There has been a good deal of rhetoric about widows
driven from their homes engulfed by high-powered alien
sub—dividers, their families disrupted, forced sales of
old homesteads, dislocation, unemployment,' etc.  The
above verbiage is all found a dissenting opinion filed in
Maryland in 1960 when the State Supreme Court declared
the original preferential assessment act in violation of
the state constitution.
         I have put together some data from the computer bank,
of the B. C. Assessment Authority on the concentration of
ownership of different classes of property in the several
assessment areas in the province. Here is the Richmond—
Delta assessment area, a part of the Vancouver urban fringe.
The Gini ratio for farms is .70, for industrial .63, for
residential .32. The only kinds of real estate more concen-
trated than farmland are commercial and exempt.
       The mean value of farm real estate can only be esti-
mated since these farm assessments are based on capitalized
farm income rather than market value. COnSU1t&tCn with the
assessor, however, suggests $150,000 as the correct mean
value, as compared with $143,000 for industrial property.
These figures, note, apply to land only. Ah ha! you say,
but the industrial property has a higher ratio of buildings
to land values. True enough that is, but then it's the land
value to which the preferential assessment applies. Ranking
the farms by size I find that the smallest ones are not very
                        — 18   —




land-intensive at all. Most of the land by a wide margin
is held by the top ten per cent and there is where most
of the benfit goes. If we want to help that class of
property whose mean value is the lowest, thEn residential
and condominium property is the place for relief. if we
want to help those farmers whose assets are small, then
f arm improvements and farm laborare what call for re1ef,
not farm land.
       But what about the low income of farmers? A recent
presentation by the B. C. Federation of Agriculture to the
Commission of Enquiry into Property Taxation presented data
onf arm income in which part—time farmers were counted as
full—time people but only their farm income was counted as
income. The whole person went into the denominator but only
a fraction of his income went into the numerator. Correcting
for this it turned out that per farmer income in B. C. is
not lower than urban income at all. I wonder how many other
studies contain this obvious flaw? Is it possible that such
shoddy data might have gone unchallenged by professional
economists for years? I am afraid it is quite possible.
Look at the stuff that was generally accepted alleging to
show that the property tax is regressive. All kinds off pap
was churned out, complete with the most elementary   statistical
fallacies. When people are determined to believe somethf.ng,
anything goes, I'm afraid that's the lesson of intellectual
history.

       E     Is prefeentia1 assessment of farmland grared
in order to reconize the spédial land—intensity of farming.
        Data collected by economist Allan anvel fc       sdy
for the National Commission ori Urban Problems, showed that
farrñland values were much higher relative to urban values
than I had previously thought. The B. C. data I have been
referring to suggest quite otherwise in this province.
Of course, there is no high degree of accuracy on the land to
building ratios indicated near major cities owing to the
preferential assessment of land. There is a strong c1e
                        — 19 —




to be found however, by comparing land/building ratios
in metropolitan areas versus remote rural areas. Here the
finding is quite striking. In the Vancouver assessment area,
the percentage of total real estate value which is land
value is about 78 per cent — yes, really. But when we get.
out to remote Trail, it is more like 13 per cent, i Port
Alberni it is around 35 per cent, in Penticton, 32 per cent
and so on. One should not hasten to conclude, therefore,
that preferential land assessment is an acknowledgment of
the high land intensity of low income farmers. The facts
do not support it. According to my data, if we want to
find hig.h land intensity, we should look at real estate
activities classified as "commercial.1t There is another
class called acreage which is 99 per cent land value, so
commercial does not include purely empty speculative holdings
And while we are talking about tax exemptions, it s sorth
noting that the next most land—intensive class of property       j

is that called "exempt." A stroll around the campuses of
any of the provinces universities will give you a good idea
why




       F. The loss of scarce farmland
       It is hard to take this rationale seriously. In
the days of the soil bank, the conservation reserve and so on,
it was altogether laughable.. Now that such programs are
clearly on the wane, it might make a little more sense.
But let me record an exchange I had two months ago with
the agricultural representative of the . C. Lana Ccissi:
who was defending the Agricultural Land Reserve. It is a
terrible thing he said, that farmers are leaving the land.
Yes, I agreed. We are losing our capacity to produce food
and fibre, he warned. That is bad, I agreed. Warming
to our topic and sensing a common interest, I said, let's
get more farmers out on the land producing food and fibre.
Hold on, he said, that could create problems. Let's
                         — 20 —




intensify the use of land, let's get more out of each acre,
let's get more food to the consumer. Stop! he said, are
you crazy? Th.at wo,uld lower food prices. But, but, but
I sputtered, I thought ... &o way! he said, if you lower
food prices you will drive all farmers out of agriculture
forever, and then where would we be. My objective is to
hold this land in reserve for the next century, so we will
have something to leave our grandchildren.
    I will draw the curtainof charity over what I said or
wanted to say in response to that, but it's going to take
a fundamental change in the attitudes of farm spokesmen
before anybody else can believe they are very serious about
the danger of running out of good farmland.


       G. To contain urban sprawl.
       No, I cannot buy that one, because urban planners
are as busy at the centres of cities trying to lower density'
there as exclusionary suburbanites are at the fringes. One
group of planners kicks people out of the cities and the second
group forces them back in. The common result is to make things
tougher on people who are looking for a place to land. There
is no consistent rational of city planning to be observed
other than exclusiveness.



     THE LIKELY DAMAGES FROM EXCLUSIONARY POLICIES
       A. Exclusionary policies take the form of enforcing -
low density living and this is expensive. It increases the
land and capital and fuel and commuting time costs of life,
and reduces the effective levels of constructive urban
linkages and synergism, achievable for any given costs.



       B. Structural unemployment
       Wh.en areas or jurisdictions stop competing to
attract people, and worse when they compete to exclude people,
they weaken the guest for payrolls. Now, everyone wants to
                          — 21 —



    attract capital intensive industry if any industry. Labor
    seeking employment is driven from pillar to post. This
    is especially true of cheap labor. The rate of unemploy-
    ment of teenage blacks is up around 40 or 50 per cent.
    Could this have something to do with the fact that so few
    jurisdictions will encourage the entry of the kind o
    employers who might offer them jobs?

           C. Locational segregation
           Locational segregation, the sorting of people
    according to wealth and income, is now carried to great
    extremes in American cities, replacing other social controls.
    But is it replacing them, or are there simply no social
    controls over many segments of society now, other than
    police, and often not them? And what about the high economic
    costs of locational segregation? There is a natural flow
    of exchange between high and low income people, which is
    made very difficult by locational segregation.

           D. Dividing society into classes
           When the value of property rises and remains high,
    it naturally divided society between those who have and
    those who do not have property. Always, before now, in
    North American history, the exuberance of land developers
H   and, competing jurisdictions has brought down the value of
    real estate and blurred the distinction between the haves
    and have nots   Now, on the other hand, we are in danger of
    developing a class structure more rigid than anything ever
    seen before over a long period of time on this continent.
    A class structure without social controls, leads to divisive-
    ness, crime, hostility, counter—culture, welfare dependency
    and all the other unpleasant things we see burgeoning today.
                            — 22 —



•
           E. Inefficient allocation of land
           Exclusionary policies require planners. Planners
    are generally allergic to market conditions. If they have
    an engineering background, they talk about "requirements",
    or fixed coefficients of land per person, which are independ-
    ent of price. Some of them are recreationists, who regard
    lower economic uses as higher social uses and would sacrifice
    commerce and industry to parks and wilderness areas. I cannot
    forecast the results in detail, but I can guarantee you they
    will be less efficient than anything a free market would come
    up with.


           F. Absentee ownership
           One of the historical motives for encouraging immigration
    was to put settlers on land of their own and reduce the number
    and power of absentee land owners. Excluding immigrants
    undoubtedly has the opposite effect. If we want land safely
    in the hands of a passive investor who only wants some
    security for the future and has no plans to use it, why there
    are lots of such people, in Germany, Switzerland, Belgium
    and elsewhere who are happy to oblige given the opportunity.
• Whether this is the wa to create healthy communities, I
    seriously doubt.

    IV. SOLUTIONS
           Exclusionary policies have an aggregate impact which
    is quite different from the impact intended by their local
    sponsors   These impacts in the aggregate are quite damaging
    as indicated. It behooves us therefore to seek solutions.
    The nature of the solutions follow quit directly from the
    analysis of the problem.
                          — 23 —



       A.    Fiscal aspects of a solution
       We must simply reverse the fiscal arrangernentsthat
create the problem. Instead of levying onerous taxes on
individuals the federal government should reduce the tax
burden on individuals as such, and replace it by increased
taxes on property. I do not mean that the federal govern-
ment should invade the field of property taxation, currently
pre—empted by provincial, state and local governments,
although, constitutionally this could be done if regLired
However, it should only be necessary to reform the income
tax in a variety of ways that have been recommended by many
tax refOrmers for other reasons anyway. Close the loopholes
now available to property and open some for labor.
       On the granting side, federal grants should go to
persons in the forms of social dividends rather than to
governments in the forms of shared revenues, capital grants
and so on.
       States and provinces too, are in the business of grant-
ing subventions to local governments. These grants could be
changed and allocated to persons instead of governments. For
example California, in response to the Serrano decision, could
go to a statewide property tax and distribute school aid in
the form of vouchers to school children. Or it could base
school support on average daily attendence.
       Central governments should reduce or eliminate
grants made to local governments as such. Local governments
are essentially a collection of local landowners working to-
gether to maximize the value of their land. Grants to local
governments are essentia]ly grants to landowners, therefore,
grants which increase their wealth without requiring then
to turn the land tothe service of other people. Conceivably
a local government might have only one landowner, in which
case the situation would be dramatically clear, and in fact,
there are such cases. There is a special service district
                        — 24 —



in California, for instance, in the San Francisco Bay area,
clothed with the powers and immunities of sovereignty,
representing only one landowner. There are company towns
everywhere, many o them in Brittsh Columbia, with
essentially one owner. I have never ceased being mystified
at the frame of mind among certain Washington or Ottawa
liberals wbo believe there is something socially wholesome
 about taxing the payrolls of poo-r working stiffs to share
revenues with the owners of these cornpany towns.
       Federal authorities in Canada and the United States
could both limit the local use of kinds of taxes that tend
to repel pOpulation, thus forcing greater reliance on
promotional taxes. Under the British North America Act
provin'ces are theoretically limited tO the use of "direct"
taxes, which could, if Ottawa wished,be construed very
narrowly to keep the provinces out of taxation of sales
or for that matter, the taxation of anything except land,
because the tax on land is the only tax, which, so far as
I am aware, can never be shifted, and" therefore which
deserves to be called "direct."


       B. Environmental aspects
       The nature of the solution is dictated by the nature
of the problem and consists of at least six measures. First
and most obvious, is direct action against polluters and
noise makers of various kinds. Second, is a reduction in
the technological multiplier of personal offensiveness. This
may be achieved by a combination of taxation, direct controls
and outright prohibition of technological apparatus whose
externalroffensiveness is large relative to its possible
value to the owner. I never 'cease to find it incredible
for example, that communities should allow irresponsible
children to possess mini-bikes and that it should require
the intervention of a policeman to stop them from issuing
iQud noises thatmaydisturb the peace for several blocks
around. Third is a general 'increase in the equality of per-
sonal behavior and considerateness Fourth is a decline in
                        — 25 —



the incentives for ownership of personal consumption capital.
I do not mean that we should impoverish ourselves. I refer
to the bias in the tax system, whereby capital devoted to
the service of others earns money income which is taxed
while capital devoted to personal use yields imputed income
which is tax tree. Fifth would be a decline in the amount
of public space which is made available to polluters. Sixth
and last, would be a decline in the ability of the
leaders of society, the people with the real clout, to escape
from pollution. What happens now of course, is that people
who have made it go off to or beyond the suburbs and surround
themselves with lots of space'.to escape from pollution. This
is part of the whole pattern of locational segregation which
I have been criticizing. Anything which weakens the ability
of social leaders to escape from the problems which they
create will, of course, increase their incentive to solve'
those problems for everyone.

       C. Suburbanization and Balkariization
       The orthodox "good guy" solution to this problem is
to expand urban jurisdictions into metropolitan jurisdictions
I do not favor this myself, because I think metropolitan
settlement has already proliferated over four or five times
as much land as would be economically desirable for the
number of people involved. And the metropolitan jurisdiction
would undoubtedly be a vehicle for strengthening the cross—
subsidization of the low density neighborhoods by the high
density neighborhoods, the economic institution which created
half the problem in the first place. The solution is rather
for the remains of the central city to pull itself together
and adopt growth—oriented renewal policies which would cause
it to suck In most of the proliferating demand and become
a city once again.
                        — 26 —



       D.   Cross—subsidization
       Many seers have pronounced it hopeless to set up
a rate structure that was anything but uniform over wide
areas. They are mistaken. We already have declining
block rate structures and the current movement towards
inverted rate structures is a practical step in the direct-
ion of encouraging smaller customers, and smaller customers
characteristically live at higher density. A more direct
approach is taken by utilities in California and the U. S.
Pacific Northwest. Zonal rates provide higher electric
rates for areas of lower density. Pacific Gas and Electric
is the leading example, since it has five zonal rates for
its service which ranges from very rural, less than ten
customers per mile of distribution line, to the high density
area of Oakland and San Franciso with over 200 customers
per line mile. What is needed is a reinforcement and exten-
sion of this good example.
       At the same time of course, we need pressure towards
"positive containment". Scattered settlement is often blamed
on people who choose to locate far out and surely enough,.
they share the blame. Equally responsible, however, are
people who own land near in but fail to develop it intensive-
ly. Their role is normallyoverlooked. What is needed is
the positive pressure of a stiff land tax based on the value
of centrally located lands to encourage intensive central
development in a positive way.
       Just how we get from here to there in every detail is
beyond the scope of a short paper. I have tried however to
indicate that these are not far out and unthinkable proposals,
but merely extensions and applications of practices already
being observed in some places. Thus remedial policy may be
fundamental and effective without being revolutionary or
catastrophic.
