       The Synergistic City: Its Potentials,
             Hindrances and Fulfillment

                         by
                    Mason Gaffney
         University of California, Riverside

      A Paper for the Colloquium on Land Policy
                 The Lincoln Institute
               Cambridge, Massachusetts

                   October 28, 1977
    To be published by The Lincoln Institute and
    Judith deNeufville, editor



    The object of human organization is synergy,
combining parts into a whole greater than their sum.

Large organizations seek synergy in hierarchy and
financial controls. Cities achieve it by bringing
independent actors into mutual access so they can
cooperate via free contracts and association in the

marketplace, in government and society. This paper
purports first to show how market allocation of land

operates to foster urgan synergy. It seeks to define
the elements of synergy as follows. The synergistic
city maximizes access to the resource features that

determined the city's location. It maximizes mutual
access amon residents and visitors. It lets them
share common costs. It encourages specialization. It
increases competition. It maximizes options. It
                          —2—

increases flexibility. It pools arid diversifies risks.
It facilitates innovation. It nourishes and spreads

information, culture, education, and discovery. It is a
medium in which small businesses can flourish through
mutual aid.

     Second, the paper treats hindrances to realizing

the urban promise. There are parasitic and sapping land

uses which prey on the surpluses generated by synergy
and weaken the city. Polluting uses are one. Then, there
are land uses which are cross-subsidized in mass systems.

Absentee ownership may be parasitic. Crowding the lot
lines may sap value from neighbors. Some land uses demand
more than their share of the social infrastructure and

overload it. Old buildings sap value from new ones.

Unused land breaks up urban synergism. Some land uses
appear parasitic because they benefit from redistributive

taxation. Some uses are too self—contained to participate

in a synergistic city.

     Third, the paper recommends policies for discouraging
the sappers and encouraging the mutually nourishing land
uses that can potentially bring cities to full flower and
make our cities the best of all human environments.
                          —3—


THE URBAN PROMISE AND THE lAND MARKET: TIlE CITY THAT

MIGHT HAVE BEEN AND MIGHT BE
     The Neo-Classical Rationale for the Urban Land
Market -- A Reminder of Old Truths

     There has long been a tolerably developed rationale
for the function of the urban land market. Land rent is
the return net of all costs, and market forces drive land

to the use yielding the highest net rent. High rents in
good locations reserve land from lower uses in order to
make it available for higher ones. The dollar as a
measure of benefits and costs is much more comprehensive
and well balanced than single-valued alternatives touted by

many critics of the market. Some of these are agricultural

fundamentalism, highway imperialism, elitism, naturalism,

alleged "needs" and engineering "requirements" (regardless
of price), and various theories of value based on labor,

energy, residuals' generation, export earnings, open
space, and judgments about distributive equity. The
market rationale may be found in neo-classical writers

like Richard T. Ely, George Wehrwein, Richard Ratcliff,
Homer Hoyt, and Arthur Weimer. A related group, the
location theorists, have given special attention to the

importance of minimizing transportation costs. They have
shown that when land goes to the highest bidder the
result is to minimize society's aggregate transportation
burden. Location theorists have observed an artificial
                           -

distinction between "urban" theory which asks at what
point things are located and "agricultural" location

theory which asks also how much land is to be used.

"Agricultural" location theory is obviously misnamed,
and of paramount importance in cities.

     Although some location theorists have no doubt over-

stressed minimizing transportation costs, most have
remembered that other location factors are important too,
such as bearing strength, drainage, air quality, and so
on. Demands and costs expressed in money make these
different values commensurable.

     Rents on good land do not drive people away unless

inadvertently by being set too high for anyone. In general,
charging rent forces land to be used intensively. Rent
drives away lower users only to save land for higher ones.

Occasionally even good economists lapse into a confusion
of the distributive arid allocative effects of rent.

Distributively, rent eutralizes the advantage of a good
location from the user's point of view, since the landlord
charges what the land is worth. Allocatively, however,
paying this rent does not inhibit land use but the contrary,
it forces intensive use,

     Some Underemasized Aspects of the Neo—Classical
Rationale for the Urban Land Market
     There is a weakness for scholars to bounce the same

ideas back and forth and overwork a few parts of The Great
                            -5—

Conversation, neglecting equally important matters. While
the following points are touched upon in the literature

they do not receive proper attention. Yet, they are

implied by the neo-classical rationale and might fairly
be considered part of it.

     Compacting and Centripetal Forces
     Land values are marked by continuity in space, both
concentric and axial, resulting in a kind of star-shaped
pattern. The call of the market is to develop land
adjacent to land already developed, rather than to leap-

frog. This strong clustering propensity results in great
economy of all area-sensitive costs. Many public and
semipublic costs are functions of area served rather than

population served. There is fire protection, especially
brush and wildiand fires; drainage and flood control; pest

control; aquifer recharge; refuse disposal (because of the

need for disposal sites); air quality control; protection
from noxious land uses; noise control, like protection from

runways; access to all breaking points where trunk transit
is converted to local transit; access to the urban growth

pole; access to government; circulation networks and
collection and distribution networks of all kinds; access

to any specialized service or facility; radio spectrum
coverage; and so on.

     All these factors are interacting and reinforcing.

Compact settlement caused originally by one factor, say
                          -6-
common water supply, creates the precondition for economical

provision of other public and private services requiring a

compact focused population. Each trip may now serve more
purposes, Mass transit and foot transit may replace
individual vehicles, and the more so as each linkage

requires a shorter trip. High rise buildings develop the
third dimension of the city with vertical transportation

providing additional linkages without loading the streets.
Increased central tendency reduces cross traffic. Increased
volume at the center makes it more economical to bridge

and pierce natural barriers there, thus increasing mutual
access. Load factors increase on all capital facilities,
spreading the costs around the clock and calendar, The
need for interurban travel and freight movement is sharply
reduced as the larger city becomes more self-contained.

     In recent years there has been increasing attention

to the costs of sprawl and, by implication, the gains of
compact settlement.' Both the friends of sprawl and the
enemies of the market have sought to attribute sprawl to
workings of the markets but sprawl results from distortions
and subsidies in the market rather than a fair market.
Recent studies have emphasized how sprawl wastes time and

wastes capital. Future studies will certainly emphasize how
it wastes energy. A free market would have and still would
spare us from energy-intensive settlement patterns.
                             —7


        Another important market function is to coordinate
and synchronize private investment with public investment.

Public spending on streets and associated capital gives
value to privately-owned lots. It is to secure the latent

rents from these lots that owners improve them, thus
preventing the public investment from lying waste. This
process works even better if the public raises land assess-
ments at the time of investing in streets, thus building a

double fire under the landowner. Synchronizing private

response to public investment saves the public paying

interest on unproductive capital by putting it right to

use. Anticipating this economy, public agencies can plan
their infrastructure better: they can build short lines

of high capacity serving small compact areas fully, rather
than long lines of low capacity, making service available
to large areas most of which will not be developed for some
time.

        A most important effect is the mutual reflection of
external gains. The improvement of lot A enhances the
rentability of lot B, motivating its owner to improve it
even more. The greater improvement of lot B in turn
enhances the rentability of lot A, and so on back and

forth. Anticipating this effect, each owner may very well
improve to a higher level than he would if he lacked
confidence that the other owners would be improving. If
this process works right, it has somewhat the same effect
                          -8-

as "internalizing externalities," an advantage sometimes

thought to be peculiar to planned unit developments (PIJDs).
Here is perhaps the greatest and most subtle beauty of

the well-functioning synergistic city. It achieves the
gains of scale without the costs of scale. It gets
atomistic individual landholders working together without

crushing their individuality in a large organization. It
lets there be association with independence, without

hierarchical control. To pull individuals together without

crushing or regimenting them is surely the highest
aspiration of human organization.
     The result of all this constructive interaction is

urban synergy which means there are increasing returns to

the city collectively, even while each individual land

parcel is used in the stage of diminishing returns.

Realizing the potential of increasing returns calls for
skill on the part of city government as it supervises

urban circulation, because the returns are not to gross

mass of population but to mutual access. They are realized
most strongly at points of maximum access, urban nuclei

of maximum intensity and maximum land value from which
both intensity and land value taper off at a steep gradient.

     Sheer size is important, however. William Alonso

summarizes his findings "In every country for which I have

found evidence, local product per capita ... rises with
urban size, and where comparable figures on cost are avail-
able, these rise far more slowly if at all."2
                          -9-

     The philosophical proof of increasing returns is that

urban land values rise without taking anything from the
returns to other imputs, capital and labor. The free flow

of capital and labor among regions keeps their risk-
adjusted returns at more or less common levels throughout
the economy, and indeed wage rates are somewhat higher in
bigger cities. So urban rents and land values do not rise
because city landlords have any superior formula for
exploiting labor. They rise because urban land is more
productive. This premium productivity is a kind of "free
lunch" generated by social and economic progress and the
spillover benefits of good mutual access. Its very
existence testifies to increasing returns in urban growth
and organization. Alonso might have added to his data the
evidence that land values per capita tend to rise with city
size, too, a fact we can never explain if we focus only on
the faults of cities.

     Institutional Bias: Government Failure and Narket
Failure

     Some leading neo-classical urban land economists
let themselves be drawn into the role of "explainers"
who not only analyzed but had to vindicate everything
that happened. This leads to defending the indefensible
and, finally, to disrepute. We need to understand how a
fair, unbiased market would work but we also need to
understand the market is rarely free from bias. Part of
                         - 10 -


what an observer may dislike about market choices he needs
to accept and simply say he was outvoted by the preferences

of others. Other things about the market one may properly
lay, however, to unfair bias. The part of wisdom is to
learn the difference.

     One form of government failure is in its manner of

levying taxes. Urban synergism generates taxable surpluses
obviously, and generations of economists have identified
urban rent as a splendid taxable surplus. But when taxes
vary with the use to which land is put they bias land-

owners in favor of the use taxed more lightly. Another
failure of government is bad planning of urban circulation.

The general bias is towards cross-subsidy within the
consolidated accounts of city public works departments.
Another government failure is dereliction of duty to

control pollution or, almost as bad, controlling pollution
in capricious and irrational ways.

     Then there are market failures. A conspicuous bias
in the bidding for urban land is the differential power

of accumulated wealth to put up front money. Wealthy

individuals, wealthy corporations and large financial
institutions have a special advantage in any investment

that requires much "patient money" that can wait a long
time for a large payoff. This means holding exurban land
for appreciation. It means assembling land for large

integrated developments where "externalities may be
                         — 11 —

internalized."   It means holding land around operations with

growth potential "for future expansion" -- maybe.   Neo-

classical explainers have seen these phenomena as part of the

best of all possible worlds and thus given arms to market
critics who see the whole thing as a conspiracy of the rich

against the poor. They have failed to forearm market

supporters against the siren song of planned unit development,
and failed to draw a clean clear line between functions

properly private and those properly public.
     In the following pages I will use the term "fair market"

to mean a market free of institutional bias both public and

private. "Free market" has come to mean a market without
price controls but that is not enough. To serve society a
market must be free of bias: a fair market.

     Timing
     The explainers missed the mark badly in their treatment

of timing land developments as they sought to rationalize land

speculation. Ely's theory of "ripening costs" made a virtue
of holding for the rise, and overlooked or accepted the in-

stitutional biases that carried it to excess. Economists in
other fields have developed the concept of maximizing present
value as a guide to timing investment and replacement decisions.

Real estate professionals use the concept of maximizing dis-
counted cash flow as a standard guide. Still lacking is any
global demonstration that the sum of individual timing

choices leads to a system optimum. In the highly interdepen-
dent business of land use succession in urban neighborhoods,

the land uses are interdependent but the individuals are
                            — 12 —

wrapped in the cocoons of their personal income tax circum-
stances and credit ratings.     What is needed is not a
rationale since the results are indefensible. What is
needed is a formula for institutional reform to make the

market work better.
     The Elements of Increasing Returns
     Urban synergy has been called a black box by some and
an empty box by others. Let's itemize its contents.
     Access to Key Resources

     Cities locate originally on harbors, railheads, cross-

roads, hubs, confluences, crossings, water sources, amenities,
capitals, and so on. Good circulation focuses access on these
features and aids their further development.

     Mutual Access of Urban Dwellers and Visitors
     Those who cluster around the original attracting resource
find and create a supplemental attraction in each other. Some-
times they may degrade the original amenities like the clean
air of Los Angeles, yet create artifical amenities like
Disneyland which we may ridicule and yet which attract still

more people. Markets and storage facilities develop synergistic
relations with each other, leading to manufacture, innovation
and tertiary services. Beyond the commercial and industrial
convenience people cluster for social, educational and

cultural reasons. Access is mutual so clustering is self—

reinforcing over a long stage of increasing returns.
     Sharing Common Costs
     There are common costs of developing basic locational

resources; of local consumption facilities like utilities
                         —13—
and services whose optimal scale is large; of common supplies

needed by many producers; of bringing in buyers who will
support many sellers; and so on.

     Allowing Higher Specialization
     The division of labor, said Adam Smith, is limited by
the extent of the market and the same is true of the division
of buildings, equipment and inventories. The same is true of
urban land which may also specialize. The extent of the market
is greatest where access is best. Everyone can supply his own

examples of specialized people and machinery. Specialized land
refers to neighborhoods like a carriage trade shopping center,

or furniture district, or Vieux Carre, whose development
attracts a particular clientele or supports the development
of specialized facilities like unloading cranes in a port.

Large markets permit large scale production, of course, but

equally important they support specialized production by
small sellers who serve a minute part of the total market.

Variety of sellers and available goods and services foster
specialized and unusual and innovative manufacturing which
requires a variety of small inputs on tap in one place.

Specialization in the simple sense of monoculture is found
in many company towns and small cities. It is specialization
in the sense of variety and diversity that marks the large

central market. Regional specialization in farm and other
primary producing areas outside of cities presupposes cities
as centers of exchange and processing and storage and finance,
for which the city takes a large cut of the pie.
                         - 14 -
     Whetting Competition
     The conditions of workable competition, that is many

sellers and many buyers, presuppose a central meeting place
where many come together. Cities not only support varied
facilities, but more of each. By competing these make the
city more attractive and attract still more buyers and

sellers, and the total effect spares consumers from inonopo—

listic exploitation in many forms.   Competitors seeking to
differentiate themselves will be led to add choice and variety
and innovation and improvement.

     Although large markets permit large scale operations, the
average size of firm in larger cities is smaller than outside
them. It is in large cities that small independent firms
find the infrastructure and support which they need to fill
a small niche in a large economy. Specialization is not
peculiar to large firms but to large economies. It is easier
in the city to enter business with a small capital and less
devastating to exit. Entry and exit are the life of compe—
tition. There is also a large labor pool for the small
businessman and a large supply pool and a number of competing

lenders. The large numbers assure him the continuity of
service even though he does not control his sources,nor is he
obliged to stick with them in the event his needs change.

Small firms achieve the gains of vertical integration without

losing their freedom, adaptability and speed.
     Adding Range of Choice
     A large central market brings a variety of services and
products and facilities over the threshold of viability,
                          -   —




giving substance to "free choice." It also adds choice to
social life and personal friendship. The courtship market

is a very real and important phenomenon attracting young
people to cities. The existence of many options makes the
city a place for discovery. It is a place to learn, to keep
"with it" for profit, education, excitement and enjoyment.

The city as a big apple is a sort of collective public good
like a library whose use by one person does not interfere
with use by others. It is indeed the obvious place to locate
public goods like libraries to maximize their exposure and,
therefore, their value.

     The central market also offers more choice in disposal

of products. By-products may be used and put to higher uses
where there are many buyers. Salvage and recycling of old
parts and materials are central market functions. In lean
territory, collection costs prevent otherwise economical

salvage and recycling. The Navajo Indians, it is true, use
every part of the sheep far from cities, but their isolation

prevents the by-products entering into exchange and moving to
the highest use; whIle in the city, the hides of worn-out
dairy cows are tanned for leather and finally subdivided into

grades and distributed to hundreds of specialty uses throughout

the market area, always in search of the top dollar which is
to say the use most wanted by consumers. The mutual interest
that buyers and sellers have in access determines the amount
each bids for land in particular places causing the market
to locate activities for maximum mutual aid and synergism

of this kind.
                         - 16 -
     Promoting Flexibility and Adaptability
     The central market with its backup pools of resources is

the place where inputs may be combined and recombined quickly
in the face of shifting demands and costs. Penalties for
starting and stopping are lighter leading to faster turnover
and replacement with embodiment of the latest knowledge in

physical capital. Sub-contracting allows organizational
flexibility. Excess diversified capacity accommodates varia-
tions in supply and demand. Peak needs for capital may be
accommodated from the central pool and peak needs to invest

surplus capital find many outlets. The slack is there for

change, emergency1 and innovation.
     Pooling Resources and Risks
     The flow of rivers varies much less at their mouths than

their various tributary sources because offsetting variations
are pooled. Likewise, central markets have an aggregate
stability in spite of large individual variations. Load
factors on large capital facilities are smoothed. Labor
unemployment is minimized. Several family members may find
suitable work within one market, minimizing needs to migrate.

Inventory requirements are reduced because of pooled varia-
tions, increasing turnover and volume per unit of capital.
Savers and borrowers get together through an elaborate

financial apparatus. Control over capital leads to control
over industrial organization -- a mixed blessing for the

world, perhaps, but an advantage for the city.
                            — 17 —

     Stimulating Creative Activity and Thought
     Central markets serve an incubating function for new

industries and techniques which require access to varied
supplies and the stimulation of varied ideas. In primary
producing areas monoculture breeds monotony arid simple minds

limited by the routines of just one industry and often, too,

by the dependency of branch plant psychology. In cities,
information and ideas from many sources and viewpoints

impinging on one mind provide the stuff of creative thinking.
Urban cliquishness and overspecialization and social strati-
fication and strife limit the realization of this potential,

but the potential is there.
     Providing a Medium for Culture
     The central market with its variety of people, resources

and ideas is the medium for the flowering of education, research,

entertainment, social life, cooperatLon, and advanced thinking.
Periodic retreats from the tension and tyranny of fashion can

also be creative, but the central market is the place where the

idea generated anywhere finds its greatest exposure. The city
is the stage for the fullest personal development and fulf ill—
ment in a social context.

     Rec iprocating-Re inf ore ing Spillovers

     This most subtle synergistic effect gives small land—

owners in large cities the advantages of planned unit

development without the heavy cost of stifling individual
spontaneity in large organizations. Suppose, to introduce
the point, that buildings could be heightened one story at

a time. Owner A opens the scene with a three-story building
                         - 18 —
complementary to Owner B, his neighbor. Owner B responds
with a four-story building which causes Owner A to go to
five stories, and so on until diminishing returns call a

halt to further heightening. In fact, height decisions can
be made only once every thirty years or so, but the market
tends to orchestrate the process by setting a level of land

values that requires buildings of a certain height, with

each builder anticipating the others. The market works
best, of course, when lubricated by a stiff tax on land

values. A planned unit developer to accomplish the same
end would have to spend years and decades assembling land

in secret, blighting a neighborhood to weaken holdouts and
reduce his own tax costs while waiting. And the completed
PUD, even if successful, would be isolated from the rest of
the city and detract from the synergism of the whole by

self-containment.

     Facilitating Communication
     Close personal association of buyers and sellers in
central markets lets them read each other with a minimum

expenditure on costly advertising and wasteful packaging
and artificial preserving such as characterize modern

merchandizing in our sprawled settlement patterns.
     In summary, cities exist to bring people together for
mutual aid. The land market when properly lubricated
allocates land so as to support this basic urban function.
                          - 19 —
    KILLERS OF THE DREftJI:   PARASITES IN PARADISE

    Urban surpluses attract sappers the way blood attracts

leeches. We now itemize these parasitic effects, picking up
clues as we go as to whether we might best overcome them by

perfecting the market mechanism; by government regulation of

private land use: or, by increasing the power of large private
landowners to plan and implement large unit developments.
     Pollution

     Polluting one's neighbors is sapping them economically.
The polluter, in effect, appropriates an easement over the

neighbor's property in order to help himself. I do not accept
the idea that victims who strike back are equally demanding

easements over the property of polluters, because they are not
objecting to what is contained within the polluter's 1t lines;
they are objecting to what spills over. The Coase-Chicago

proposal that victims negotiate with polluters over payments
to cease and desist would, I believe, subject victims to
extortion and be unworkable and inequitable. Where there are
many polluters and victims there is no way to organize the
market. Where there are few polluters and few victims, there
is no way for the market to be competitive, even if we settle

upon a definition of property rights before the bargaining
begins. We here dismiss this approach to pollution control as
an overenthusiastic overextension of the generally good case
for free markets, and will seek other avenues for applying
market solutions to the problem.

     It is a serious mistake on the part of many and perhaps

most observers to think that pollution is a necessary cost of
                         — 20 —

central city density, and a limit on it. Open space, in fact,
generates a good deal of pollution directly, and more indirectly.

Open space includes, for example, dumps and junkyards, parking
lots, the aprons of drive-ins including gas stations, car lots,

industrial open storage, mines, farms sprayed with pesticides,

artillery ranges, airports, rail yards, and freeways. Large
lawns in residential areas mean powermowers which destroy much

of the peace and quiet sought in the seclusion of the large
lot. They imply weaker social controls over adolescents with
unmuffled vehicles and PA systems, whose ability to penetrate

the air seems to increase with the square of the distance from
us. Vacant lots and acreage in urban areas, once defended as

playfields for the innocent sports of childhood, now harbor

acoustical vandals with motorcycles. Weeds grow uncontrolled,
seeding the neighbor's lands. Sidewalks go unshoveled in
winter and some day the fields are sold for tracts so the

community that relied on them in lieu of parks goes without.

     The indirect effects of open space are polluting because

open space has to be traversed, and transportation is the

greatest polluter, especially when we include stationary
sources that serve transportation demands, like oil refineries.
Land reservations near the central market do not really create

open space, they rather relocate it. That is, they destroy
it elsewhere. As settlement sprawls outward seeking unreserved

space, the sprawl process destroys more than it reserves for
to reach the remote sites people drive further using more

roads and cars, both of which require vast space themselves.
                         — 21 —

     Some open space has positive edge effects, notably certain

exclusive golf courses. But, cemeteries -- which, in Milwaukee,
occupy more space than all industry -- have a demonstrable

negative effect on values across the street, especially commer-
cial ones, while industrial plants have demonstrable positive
effects. Both these effects stood out clearly in an intensive
study of land values in Milwaukee which I performed with data
from 1958 to 1965. Parks, which used to have positive effects,
are changing more and more into nuisances with the modern

decline in public behavior and social controls.
     Pollution, therefore, does not place a limit on urban
compactness and agglomeration. Clean environment is a comple-
ment of intensive urbanization and not a substitute.3

     Individuals, neighborhoods, and small communities find

some refuge in large lots and the preservation of vacant
acreage roundabout. It would be a fallacy of composition,
however, to generalize from these subsystems to the whole
system. Since most people are more aware of neighborhood

subsystems than whole metropolitan systems, this fallacy is

widespread. But, at best, low density enclaves export
pollution, beggaring their neighbors. In the process, they
create much more in view of the effects on metropolitan
circulation.

     Overall, therefore, land use controls are a small part
only of the antipollution effort. They are no substitute for
direct action against polluters. Public policy at the state
and federal levels should discourage local policies of

reducing pollution by dumping it on others and encourage
                           — 22 —

direct action against polluters. We are undergoing in our
generation the prolonged cultural shock of accepting this
necessity with its limitations on our license and its need

to spend money and political effort to curb unreconstructible
vandals by force and social control.

     Government landownership•does not hold much promise of
solutions when we look at the record. Public behavior in
public places is often controlled by Gresham's Law since so
much offensive behavior is below the threshold of legal and
social control. The police have not succeeded in making

highways and streets pleasant neighbors. Military bases and
the TVA are among the polluters least responsive to victim
protests, but government officials are responsive to the demands
of motorbikers who are allowed extensive access to federal

lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management. On
public waters, motorboats receive more protection from state
laws than those wishing not to be the victims of noise

pollution. The operating principle is that the ownership of
an expensive vehicle carries with it the privilege of pre-
empting more public space than is allowed to the simple
pedestrian or swimmer. An attack on the offending vehicle by
the naked victim would be a crime against property, while the
constant assaults of the vehicle on the victim are unpunishable.

     It    is not, therefore, the weakness of government but the
mindless attitudes of the government and the people that are
at fault. The attribution of power and prestige and even
affection to large polluting vehicles is at fault. A change
in these attitudes is thoroughly consistent with a return to
                         — 23 —

urban civilization and an appreciation of the benefits of
closeness. Closeness makes us more aware of each other and
more considerate. It is easier to remonstrate with the person
who blows smoke in your face than the one whose car blows

exhaust in your air as he speeds away.

     There is this idea that nature ennobles a man while

cities degrade him. But, in fact, face to face contact of
unarmed individuals outside the shells of motorboats, snow-
mobiles, all-terrain vehicles, landrovers and other apparatus

of being "close to nature" is the basis of civilized behavior.

In a compact group the burden of proof rather naturally slips
from the victim to the polluter where it belongs, and this is
the most effective remedy. Pollution, then, is not a limit on
closeness. It is, rather, a limit on the distance that can be

kept between people while maintaining some sort of civilized
society. The solution to pollution is not dilution but controls
and control, by whatever means exercised, is a natural by-

product of the synergistic city.
     Cross-Subsidy in Mass Systems
     Wilbur Thompson has labeled the city "a distorted price

system."4 Most mass systems which comprise urban circulation
use consolidated accounts, masking the fact that service to

some places makes money while service to others loses it. The
rich territory carries the lean territory, thus transferring
rents from one to the other. In the process a great deal of
potential rent is dissipated and destroyed by extending service
to sub—economic areas which have to be subsidized. The over-

all patterns are primarily twO:    the center is sapped to serve
                         - 24. -
the fringes, especially ragged fringes; and high density
areas are sapped to serve low density areas. This pattern

of cross-subsidy follows simply from "postage-stamp pricing" ——
that is, charging common rates regardless of location and
different distribution costs. The bias is exaggerated by
the impact of promotional rate structures which give discounts

based on volume per meter, without regard to volume per unit
of area, or distance from the load centers.5

     City street systems, as an example, are priced by gasoline
taxes. Yet, they are paid for by city property taxes while the
gas taxes are used to extend long, narrow roads into lean

territory for farmers and exurbanites. Commuters congest the

city streets, pollute the city air, and sap value from the
real estate that finances these streets. Commuters by train
strengthen a central city, but car commuters sap it.

     Open space and low density land uses, in addition to

increasing circulation costs, make less positive contributions
to urban synergism. Cities exist to bring people together;

open space holds them apart. Open space in its place is a
joy, but it is not the best use of central city land, either

for the individual owner or for the whole urban system. There
is some small optimal need for open space even at the hottest
100% location, but it is there to enhance the used land, not
as an end in itself: and its value needs to be demonstrated,

not assumed. Remember, too, we are not questioning the value

of open space, but the location. Every acre of open space in
the central market destroys at least an acre elsewhere and
usually much more.
                                    - 25 -
       The problem is not that government is weak but that
government is perverse, for many reasons, including the
dereliction of most (not all) economists and political
scientists who have done too little to clarify these problems.

Government regulation of utility rates guarantees a fixed
return on aggregate invested capital without requiring that

marginal extensions support themselves. This creates regula-
tory bias, actuating utilities to invest submarginally at
their fringes to maintain their rate bases and justify higher
rates to sap their centers. Where private sellers resist

sub—marginal extensions, government often imposes a "duty to
serve" which ignores marginal extension cost. Government
subsidizes or requires the subsidy of rural extensions in

countless ways. Governmental power imposes zoning which
interdicts rent-generating high density.

       Legislatures instinctively impose territorial cross—
subsidy in the process of legislative logrolling. It results
from seeking to equalize benefits in kind rather than by

money payments, without regard to efficiency (something that
legislatures traditionally under-value).
       Strong government, rather than helping solve the problem,
is making it worse. Where ignorant armies clash by night,

nothing is gained by more fire power. The growing dependency
of cities on federal largesse creates more and more benefits
to landowners with no corresponding obligation to pay. This
means more logrollirig in city councils. In addition, it

raises logrolling to higher levels. Cities, regions and
states compete at the federal trough.
                          - 26 -
     The only workable remedy has to involve recoupment from

beneficiaries, mainly through taxation of the unearned incre-

ment of land values. By this means, government recoups its
outlays, those who get none are not injured, and landowners

will stop demanding sub-economic extensions. Wasteful cross—
subsidy only develops to the full as a species of equity in
kind among competing landowners once they have established a

system of taxing sales and income to support land values, and
a system of state and federal subventions to local governments.
Take these away and cross-subsidy among places will lose major
support.

     Taxing land values, which is popular among economists,
may be viewed as a means of making compensatory payments in
money rather than in kind. It lets planners go ahead and

favor some areas over others, developing neighborhood speciali-
zation and differentiation such as the urban promise requires.

Central rents are then redistributed in money through the

tax system rather than as now in kind through cross-subsidy.
This solution has the added benefit of being compatible with

a free market in land and, indeed, I would say necessary to
lubricate the market for optimal performance.

     Absentee Ownership
     The synergistic city carries the seeds of its own destruc-

tion when its high central and speculative land values attract

absentee owners. The absentee owner, being absent, neglects
civic duties, the many unpaid services people do for each other
out of public spirit, social pressure, mutual cooperation, and
enlightened self-interest. He may not even be a person, for
                        — 27 —

many absentees are estates and institutions. He spends his
income elsewhere and he may pay most of his taxes elsewhere,

too. He does not contribute to community chests, churches or
service clubs. If "he" is a multi-national corporation, he
is disposed to put the branch plant on and off standby for the

convenience of the corporate center. Buildings deteriorate and
employment declines. Much of this has been documented in
Jon Udell's remarkable study of the merger movement in

Wisconsin.6
     Many a central business district has gone to seed because
its absentee owners milked their holdings and failed to get

together to make timely response to the challenge of suburban
shopping centers. The research of Joseph Monsen in San Fran-
cisco identifies estates as the worst drag on CBD redevelop-
ment, causing outmigration of business to new districts.7
Estates he finds are quite inactive, seldom selling properties,
and accounting for little new construction even though they

hold large areas,

     The effective medicine for absenteeism is the same as for
cross—subsidy. Cities can build fires under derelict owners
by levying taxes based on the value of their land. These will
impact differentially hard on absentees because the ratio of
land values to buildings is in general higher for absentees

than residents; the ratio of land value to sales and income,
alternative tax bases, must also be higher. Another useful
reform would doubtless be a sunset law for unsettled estates.
                         - 28 —
     Crowding the Lot Lines
     When B crowds neighbor A's lot line, he may trespass on

A's psychic territory by blocking his view and exposing him
to noise and odors. He increases the potential for conflict
between A and B, and if A backs away then B preempts some of

the open space which A pays for. B is likely less wealthy and
many Bs will crowd community infrastructure which a few As may

have paid for already. This kind of parasitic effect is the

one first and last perceived by many people. It appears to put
a limit on closeness and, hence, the realization of synergism.

It leads to zoning whose major thrust is to limit density, and

which, where misapplied, becomes itself a major obstacle to the

synergistic city.
     The problem in the aggravated form that we know it today

is largely the product of leapfrogging. The aggravation occurs
mainly during land use succession where a high density use is
invading a low density zone. If cities grew compactly and
sequentially, if apartment districts and commercial districts
did the same, the problem would be de minimis. At its best,
indeed, the spillover effect is beneficial. It can help to
synchronize compact succession of land uses. This is most
evident where new apartments are invading an old slum area
for example. It is leapfrogging that makes this problem so
widespread and aggravated with the constant mixing of incom-

patible uses. Leapfrogging turns temporary successional
phenomena into permanent threats without much redeeming grace.
     The universal and single-minded remedy applied to this

problem is low density zoning. Zoning at its best could be
                         —29—
helpful where applied intelligently based on analysis of a

whole metropolitan system. It could contain leapfrogging
and increase pressure for infilling. Zoning which limits

density could actually often increase density by obviating
defensive buying of excess land by individuals seeking to

preclude the worst possible spillovers from Kallikak neighbors.

     Zoning in practice probably worsens leapfrogging because
it is the product of episodic political pressures rather than

systems analysis. Zoning keeps many near-in areas at low
density. It often limits access to the most desirable ameni-
ties like the lakeshore bluffs of north Milwaukee or the

California Coastal Zone, forcing population to concentrate in
less desirable areas. In newer areas with looser zoning on
the other hand, there is a strong preemptive motive to build

at high density and establish one's future grandfatherhood

before low density zoning blankets an area. When the zoning
does come, there is a strong incentive to receive a capital

gain by breaking it through inveigling councilmen of grey
ethics and expedient ideology. Between developer-financed
councilmen overstimulating building in some jurisdictions, and
citizens of exclusionary bent closing down others, the market
is shouldered aside as the arbiter of land use choices.

     A proper and limited objective of zoning would be to
maximize the joint value of contiguous lands --   let's say
two contiguous parcels. A showing of damage by B to A is
not enough reason to limit crowding. A may be more damaged

by losing his reciprocal right to crowd A. Thus a suburban
village might impose minimum lot size of five acres, as River
                         — 30 -

Hills, Wisconsin, in fact, does. The result is a remarkably
low value of land per square foot, evidenced by actual sales.

Here the owners are mutually damaging each other much more than
if all could divide into small lots.   (As a coordinated holding
action for later synchronized succession with short-term

minimization of county taxable values, the policy might make

sense, a point not pursued here.) The rule of maximizing joint
value is consistent with and implied by Michelman's fairness
test: requiring one to bear a loss is fair if the policy
applied to others is likely to help him more.8 If we could
"purify" zoning and the motives of its practitioners we would
end up with something like this —- not like River Hills.

     But, zoning which focuses on building positions probably
misses the main mark. Demands for psychological space are

culturally determined arid highly flexible, not only from
culture to culture but among regions. Much more objective is
the factor of noise and noise trespass. A concerted campaign
to control noise with appropriate legislative changes would do

much more than holding our neighbor's walls so many feet
distant. Proximity is almost totally harmless if the neighbor
is quiet. Noise control would accomplish the desired end of
privacy, peace and quiet without the enormous resource costs

in land and capital required by low density zoning.
     Another aspect of the small lot-large house problem is
the ticky-tacky tract -- the most common kind of Planned Unit

Development, incidentally. Cookie-cutter subdivisions provoke
feelings of nausea in most beholders, provoking great resistance
to density. But, why must tracts be so repulsive? Before
                         - 31 -
World War II subdivision of land was one function and building
houses was another, as a rule, meaning we got custom homes in

tracts. Many attractive older middle-aged neighborhoods remind
us of this era. What went wrong? The killer of the dream was
the lot speculator. To overcome him postwar builders turned

to tract housing.

     Besides lending itself to depressing uniformity, tract
housing lets private landowners lay out the public streets.

Attorney John Murphy of Baltimore is campaigning currently for
a return to public street planning, including initiative in
subdivision, and integration of subdivision streets into total

urban systems. This seems to me the right way to go and it
can be made to work by synchronizing private response to public

investment by laying heavy annual land taxes on improved lots.

Exempting building values from property taxes would also reduce

the pressure to skimp on building quality.
     Another way to protect the lot lines is to let buildings

rise higher. The very pleasant tree-shaded Milwaukee suburbs
of Shorewood and Whitefish Bay support population densities of

ten thousand persons per square mile, mostly on fifty-foot
lots with two-story houses. The second story is important.
The post-war rambler precludes any such density unless the
house covers the whole lot.

     Going above two stories, and perhaps even that high,

builders meet diminishing returns to height as they, in effect,

substitute capital for land, In addition, as they go higher
some one-third of their capital cost consists of building the

utility core of a high—rise building to provide vertical
                         - 32 -
transportation and circulation. These substitute for the
horizontal public systems but do not receive the same sub-

sidies. On the contrary, they are taxed. The property tax
on buildings, where heavy, raises the cost of substituting
capital for land and discourages utilization of the third

dimension. This forces buildings to spread laterally and

gobble up curtilage or open space. This becomes part of the
argument, then, for exempting buildings from the property tax
and focusing on land values instead.

     Multi-story buildings are notably cheaper to heat per
cubic foot of usable space than ramblers. Collectively they

reduce energy use in transportation by increasing density.
So, if our institutions do not bring us back to multi-story

building the energy crisis will, and in a much less pleasant

manner. Nature has her own ultimate penalties for those who

defy fact and geometry. But a happy by-product of an energy
catastrophe, if it must come, would be a rediscovery of the

synergistic city which we are losing by wasting energy.
     Overloading the Public Services

     Any under—priced public service invites expansion of
dependent land uses. "Services" include access to public
capital like streets and highways, public land like parks,

and public resources like water.

     Example number one is the auto-oriented land use.

Vehicles are generally exempt from property taxes and they

occupy mainly bare land with minimal taxable buildings.

The result is a large bias towards expansion of car lots,

drive-ins, driveways, carports, gas stations, parking lots,
                         - 33 -
outlying shopping centers, cars and campers parked on lawns,
junk yards, trucking terminals, and so on, with a big
competitive advantage to richer employers who can afford all

the bare land for employee parking. These tax-exempt vehicles

give one privileged access to the astronomical public invest-
ment in streets and highways along with license to pollute
the air and the airwaves over adjoining private land. The
vehicles give knight-in-armor dominance over peasants on
foot or bicycle. The capital and land in the highways them-
selves is tax exempt, and powerful trucking lobbies keep
increasing the allowable truck size and weight and forcing

greater spending on wider, costlier highways. Outlying and
scattered land use is also more auto-dependent: it overloads
busy streets and also requires new roads be extended for it
alone.

     Streets and roads themselves take vast lands, too, and

mega-capital to pave. Private vehicles are "appropriative
capital" - - a class of capital that serves its owner to

occupy and control a piece of the common land. Thus autos
and trucks cause expansion not just of private but also
public auto-oriented land use.

     Other "appropriative capital" items are boats, portable
radios, cigars, aircraft, beach umbrellas, water diversion
weirs, and water wells. The last two, under our appropriative

approach to water law, result usually in underpriced water,
which in turn subsidizes water-intensive land uses to expand.

These are lawns, cemeteries, farms, and golf courses, all more

scenic than Exxon aprons but equally anti-synergistic. And
                         - JLI. -

they sap the community's limitedwater sources.
    y community with amenities open to all has cause to
regard new residents as sappers of these amenities, in which

all residents have a species of equity (even though the
amenities may have been acquired without cost historically).

Sellers of raw land capture some of this amenity value each

time a new development occurs.

     Tax-exempt land users1 of course, are encouraged to
occupy more space and more valuable space than if they were

taxable, and to support their physical plant munificently
while they may starve their employees. With due respect,
there is something absurd about a church requiring a prime
downtown location to serve a handful of people for a few

hours a week and to withdraw from the life of the city behind
walls designed for the needs and tastes of a generation long

departed.

     Young parents, from a parochial view, are parasites
because their children crowd the schools. Fear of school
taxes is a major source of support for exclusionary land
use controls which break up urban synergism. The solution
here is clearly that the state which mandates compulsory
schooling should also support it. This, of course, is the
thrust of recent court decisions and will gradually be

implemented. It is important that the support go to the
parent or child as such, however, and not to the local

government as such, for the latter could support the govern-
ments without creating an incentive to accept school children.

It is also important that the property tax be shifted to the
                         - 35 —

state level along with fiscal responsibility for schools.
     Land uses harboring welfare cases evoke similar antipa-

thies but these have had less effect on land use controls
because welfare cases live in old houses with grandfather

clause protection. It is institutionally easier to oppose
new building than demolish old, although the victims of
"urban removal" know that the latter is also possible.

Again it is a good principle that the state should finance
welfare which the state mandates. Cities and counties
preaching this text have not been willing to relinquish

their monopoly of the property tax, which seems the reasonable

counterpart. A state property tax together with a state
assumption of redistributive spending would go far to mitigate
the indefensible aspects of exclusionary local policy.

     To overcome the present privileged standing of vehicles

is a long-term job calling for concerted state, local and
federal action. We must tax vehicles much more and buildings
much less. Vehicles should be taxed first because they are
capital, and if any capital is taxed vehicles should be

included. Second, vehicles should pay for pre-empting space
on the public highways, and third for polluting. It is

questionable if the insurance they pay really compensates
society for the death and injury they cause and the enormous
cost of avoidance imposed on others. However accomplished,
taming of the individual vehicle would contribute as much as
anything to releasing the constructive forces of synergism
to create great environments and great cities.
                         - 36 -
     The problem of overloading the local amenities is

largely a vehicle and apparatus problem, too. There is an
alchemy which can -anute a small, noisy, overcrowded lake

into a serene, spacious vista: simply outlaw motorboats.
Likewise, keep cars and motorbikes and P.A. systems out of
the parks. Allocate some police time to enforcing a few
more basic behavioral controls as well -- this is much

cheaper than making new parks, and less resource-using
than sterilizing all the undeveloped land in a community to

save the parks for early settlers. The policeman's salary

appears in the budget every year and is subject to heavy
payroll taxation, creating a strong cultural bias against
doing anything in a labor-intensive way. In the longer
term, this cultural bias needs correction, but even so,
there is a case for more policing of public access amenities

to offset the Greshani's Law which otherwise acts to reserve

them for the most offensive individuals.*

     In terms of equity, the right of acreage holders to sell
to people who will crowd local amenities would be stronger

were property taxes to be based primarily on land value so
that all landowners would have shared equally in the cost of
developing the amenities. Cities should annex land only
shortly before it is actually ripe for urbanization and might
levy on the annexation increment as the price of admission --
a proposal that warrants more study...

*In a still larger sense it is the national choice to sub-
stitute heavy welfare payments for the creation of job
opportunities that drives so many rough-edged juveniles to
overload the public amenities, and the only ultimate solution
is a basic reversal of our bread and circuses approach to the
unemployment issue.
                                  - 37 -
      The problem of overloading local schools is a financial
one since schools can be duplicated, and is on the way to
being solved, thanks to recent court decisions (although it

would be an unhappy economic solution if we lost the property

tax in the process). Overloading welfare finances is similarly
being solved by shifting the burden to higher levels of govern-
ment (this, too, is an unhappy solution if we neglect the

primary solution of increasing employment opportunities).
In terms of protecting urban synergism, the major business
ahead is the problem of the insolent chariots. To contain
the land-gobbling vehicles, there are several powerful greed
lobbies to overcome. These, in turn, thrive in a culture

that worships big toys and submits to their owners; that
drives people of f the land and into the streets; and that

then idealizes aggressiveness and vehicular vagrancy and
despises the victims, whether silent or in protest. To
redress the balance, we must tax private land to actuate the
owners to make it more accessible to labor; and we must either
untax buildings or tax vehicles or both.

       Old Buildin Amid New
       Old buildings often sap value from new ones nearby.

There are exceptions where the old buildings are well main-
tained or rehabilitated or were outstandingly sturdy and

munificent from the start. But, on the whole, older buildings

downgrade neighborhoods while new ones upgrade them. Old ones
pose greater fire hazards; generate more vermin and public
health problems; more old, inefficient furnaces which aggravate
                         - 38 -
air pollution; more tenancy and turnover and neighborhood
disruption.
     Public policy, although it often strikes against new
buildings of low value, tends to favor old buildings of low

value. Old buildings are exempt from requirements for off-
street parking which are forced on new ones, thus reserving
free street parking for the old. Old ones are often exempt

from some space and sanitary and just plain arbitrary require-
ments imposed on new buildings. Property taxes focused on
building values clearly favor the old over the new, so long

as the old remain blighted. Defenders of the property tax on
building values have often explained it as a kind of user

charge on the theory that public costs are in proportion to
building values. But this becomes nonsense when we compare

buildings of different age and quality. The old ones contribute
more to public costs and less to public revenues.

     These institutional biases reinforce the natural bias and

make old buildings even more parasitic. Thus, abetted by

public policy, the feedback principle that blighted land
blights back has ruined whole neighborhoods. It has brought

many to the tipping point where renewal never occurs; and a
few of them to the extinction point where land in the centerá

of the greatest cities of the greatest country becomes abso—

lutely worthless and is abandoned by the owners to the state.

     There is a natural market mechanism for continuous

urban renewal which has worked again and again so that in
many older cities already four or five generations of

buildings have occupied the same site. So long as a
                         - 39 -
city has strong neighborhoods, the land adjacent has renewal
value. When pockets of blight do develop, they are ringed by
strength which preserves the renewal value of land at the

fringes. This causes renewal to proceed from the fringes
progressively inward to the center until the pocket of blight
is eliminated. Natural market renewal anchors itself on one
side to strength and builds strength for the next step of

renewal.

     To preserve this natural renewal mechanism, we need a

fair market. An important attitudinal change is to stop

confusing slums with the welfare system (and a step beyond

that, stop confusing any welfare system with social justice
and full employment). Of all the ways to help the poor, the
preservation of unfit housing is the least humane.
     The good effects of taxing land instead of building
values should be apparent. The tax on land values offers no
obstacle to renewal, but does build a fire under the owners of
land with blighted buildings and redevelopment value.
     Other kinds of discrimination in favor of old buildings —-
the various grandfather clause privileges -- should be removed
and, if anything, reversed. It is fair to levy differential
charges on land with old buildings on the same rationale that
it is fair to levy a charge on polluters: because they blight
their environs, At the same time to strengthen this process
we need remove any hint of subsidy to outlying building. The
same collection of ordinary buildings that will downgrade and
menace an exclusive estate area will serve to upgrade a

blighted area, as well as use existing public works in the
                            - 40 -
old city. It is the city's interest to prevent the former
and encourage the latter.

     Holding Land For Future Use

    A good deal of city land is empty and unused. Empty land

pulls the city apart and hinders synergy, without the redeeming
grace of lawns and shrubbery. Like other empty space, vacant
land increases circulation costs. Let us add to the points made
previously that empty space increases the distance from the city
center to the hinterland on which the city depends for food,

refuse disposal, building materials, rural retreats and resorts,
water supply, and a significant flexible labor force element

that alternates between rural and urban work.

     A rationale for this could be that the landholder is
reserving land for a higher, more synergistic later use. If
so, reserving land could have some value. But on the whole

this rationale is a rationalization, a less than half-truth
blown into a whole truth      It overlooks the fact that most of

the costs of waiting are borne by the public while most of the
benefits go to the owner. It is also a golden outlet for
procrastination by those with the means to be insulated from
ordinary pressures to maximize their wealth and deal with
others.

     Empty land radiates uncertainty in the interdependent
business of neighborhood and community building, hampering
the coordination and synchronization among private owners
described earlier. Vacant land has rights to potential ser-

vice from capital-intensive city infrastructure, including
extensions around the empty land, without paying for it but
                          - 41 -
reserving a contingent right to load it at the owner's
convenience.
     Some land held for future use is not vacant but kept
in the terminal stages of its previous use. This can be

worse than vacant land. Farming in the van of expanding
cities runs down. The land moves to strong hands in large
tracts and the ordinary business of farming becomes inci-
dental. Capital is milked instead of replaced no one plans
for permanent farming; and healthy farm communities are
destroyed much earlier than need be. In the van of expanding

commercial districts, the results are frightful. High
speculative prices pre-empt land from resident owners.

Absentee owners milk old buildings and foster neighborhoods

of tenants and transients. These denizens in turn invade

public places downtown, and Gresham's Law weakens or destroys
the very force on which the spe...ulation is based. Blighted

property blights back. It wounds the central business district

deeply, often mortally.
     Owing to institutional bias, the timing of development
calculated to maximize individual wealth is not that which

maximizes social wealth, Taxes are based mostly on either
buildings or activities rather than land values. Building,

improving, buying, selling, working, earning income: these
are all occasions for tax levies. The tax collector is put

off by deferring improvement and minimizing action. Raw land,
on the other hand, is traditionally uriderassessed while it

appreciates quietly. This unearned income is treated much

more favorably than ordinary income under our income tax.
                           - 42 -
The individual's optimal timing is made much slower than that
which would maximize the present value of tax collections by

such tax-slanted incentives, In addition, since income tax

incentives are individualized, neighboring landowners are
subject to very different timing incentives and the synchro—
nizirig mechanism of the market is in ruins,

     Before there was an income tax, there was the same
problem, less aggravated than today, because of "front money
bias." Internal discount rates vary among individuals almost
as much as income tax circumstances, and the speculative land
market has always been one where accumulated wealth dominates,

a point established by 19th century historians.9
     Antipathy to "land speculators" often has an anti—

commercial undertone and is easily deflected by citing the
worthy individual who holds empty land, not for sale but for
his own future use. Crusading politician3 melt like butter
before the pathos of this argument. If I buy cheap today and
use dear tomorrow, there is no income tax on the appreciation.
Only when I let someone else at it am I a bad guy who deserves
to be taxed.

     Business is likewise above reproach when it holds empty
land for possible "future expansion." The "future expansion"
rationale   has its problems. It is, for one, invidious.
Policies that make it cheap for A to hold land for future

expansion at the same time make it difficult for B, who has

rio land, to acquire it for future expansion. This is a high
ante game with a sharp front money advantage reserved to those

with accumulated wealth.
                           -     -
    More subtle, more pervasive, is the effect on the
competitive land market. There is a fallacy of composition

here, "the fallacy of universal vertical integration."
Imagine a city where all the firms held land around their

plants for possible expansion on the assumption there was no

free market in which the few who actually will expand can buy
land at the time of need. This arrangement would enormously
increase the aggregate demand for land and in the process go

far to destroy the synergistic city. It would also destroy the
market for land.

     When several large firms acquire circumjacent land for

future expansion, they begin destroying the land market and
force others to hoard too, those who have the strength that
is. The land assembly market is hard to keep working at best.
This is hitting it at the weakest point. There is a snow-
balling or feedback effect, just as in the analogous market
for scarce raw materials       Vertical integration by some
forces it on others because of the threat that the free
market will disappear      If we want an economy and society
organized around free markets, we do not want to encourage
firms to hold land for future expansion.

     The future expansion rationale is based on the convenience

of those with great wealth who want to get bigger, but a free

market economy and a healthy society both need more small

independent owners. Over-concentration is a major problem
anyway. Where land carrying costs are high, i.e., when land
taxes are high, the market is fluid and new firms have a

chance to get in. In those rare cases where there are real
                         - 4.4 -
economies of scale through expansion, it permits firms to
expand at the time of need. It eliminates that spurious
and invidious economy of scale which consists in superior
ability to hold land in advance of need.

     Redistributive Taxing and Spending
     Schooling and welfare spending is mandated by the state

and imposed on localities. So is support of religion and
charity to the extent of property tax exemptions. At the
local level these requirements appear parasitic, even to the
same people who approve them at the state and federal levels.
This leads to large biases in locational incentives on the one

hand and zoning practice on the other. Poorer people seek to

invade jurisdictions of high per capita wealth, with developers
running interference and local zoning boards on the defense.

Both the offensive and defensive platoons have developed high
levels of skill at this game in which efficiency, equity and
consumer sovereignty are lost in the shuffle.

     I have previously noted how these twisted incentives may

be straightened by having the states pay individuals directly.
Or, if they must work through local government, make payments
proportional to population. Here let me add that such payments
to be effective should be net payments above tax burdens

exacted by central government. Alfred Marshall distinguished
"onerous"  from "beneficial" taxation, the former being taxes
levied for a higher government without compensating services
to the locality. Immigration invites onerous taxation by
state and federal governments because these governments tax

primarily persons rather than things. The message to local
                         - L.5 -
government is "the more people you accommodate, the more
taxes you pay," while government spending is based on other
criteria not limited to population and often not including
it, Taxing-Spending formulas become major determinants of

location.
     Central governments wishing to redistribute wealth
should tax wealth rather than persons and distribute to
persons rather than to governments. This simple truth has
been masked by generations of infatuation with the word
"income" and the idea that income taxation can be substan-

tially neutral. Income taxes as they actually exist tax
persons for working much more than they tax wealth for

yielding services or cash or unearned increments, and are
the antithesis of a social dividend. Indeed an effective way
to distribute social dividends today would simply be to abate
income taxes.

     The antipersonnel bias which is inherent in taxing

income in personarn is fortified by an aritimetropolitan bias

in the structure of the tax laws. One telling evidence of
this is research by Finis Welch and Robert Evenson finding
that farmers reported for income tax only up to 69% of their
income in North Dakota, the highest state, and as little as
2% in California and other low states.1°

     Another indicator is from the Bureau of Labor Statis-

tICss "Urban family budgets and comparative indexes for
selected urban areas."11 Personal income taxes are reported
as a budget item. For the low income budget personal income

taxes are 30% higher in metropolitan than nonmetropolitan
                         - 46 -
areas; for the high budget family they are 40% higher. In
effect the Federal Government taxes people for moving to
metropolitan areas. After the Feds have skimmed the cream,

there is that much less left to support local government.

     Territorial Segregation
     Segregation is the seamy side of choice. The urbanite's
wide range of choice forces him to screen most people out and

limit his sense of community. A wide choice of schools leads
to concentration of successful families around some, thus
impoverishing others. One or a few big city schools come to
specialize in education and others in keeping kids off the
street. Suburbs are the next step and now we have walled

compounds, prominent in Orange County, California, with gates
and guards.
     Is the answer then to reduce people's range of choice
to select their own assocites? I think not. Extreme
alienation can also be found in rural and sylvan areas. The
IWW indeed was the most militant and alienated of labor unions,

and farm workers although powerless are certainly as alienated
as any urban tenant. The basis of alienation is rather the

concentrated ownership of property by others than its residents
and workers and managers. This is compounded by subsidizing
highways to exclusive suburbs and exclusionary PUD's. The
same policies recommended abov for other purposes would
alleviate the worst aspects of urban segregation and alienation.
     Self—Contaired Land Uses
     Early America offered a contrast between two kinds of
land settiem:t. Plantations dominating some regions were
                           - '4.7 -

self—contained.   They did not need cities and did not

encourage their growth. Small farmers in other areas
depended on trade, each other, and urban craftsmen. They
needed cities and cities grew to serve them.

     Self-containment within the city is a contradiction.

The modern growth of self-contained vertically integrated
multinational corporations owning large tracts of urban
land is seriously weakening cities, therefore. The more
self-contained the firm, the greater its need for secrecy,

the greater its tendency to promote from within, to reward

seniority and to hold people with pension promises. Corporate
man becomes a citizen of the corporation first and the city

second, if at all. The corporation needs its neighbors
less and less and its New York banking and Washington politi-
cal contacts more and more. Large business landowners become
an alternative to the city, not psit of it but a hindrance to
it. The decline of the city and the rise of the corporation
go hand and hand, just as the decline of ancient Rome went
hand in hand with the rise of patrocinium and the benefice,
the PUD's of that era.12
SIThIMARY OF POLICY

     The synergistic city is the product of free choices by

independent decision makers in free markets, abetted by public

policy and planning. To make it work, community leaders need
attend to the workings of the private market; to planning and

financing public works; to equity among persons; and to land
use regulation.
                        - 48 -
    With respect to the private market, the ob is to keep
it fair by exorcising institutional biases. At present there
is a great deal of "noise" jamming the signals of the market.
Tax policy adds most to the noise. Even a tax on net income

is bad because it weakens market signals compared to the
noise (and adds noise of its own). On the other hand, a tax on

land values not only transmits market signals but helps the
market work better by amplifying the call of the consumer.

It does this by applying leveragez the tax is a fixed cost,
while revenues vary with the effort and skill managers apply

to serving consumers.

     Taxing land values lubricates the market by making it

more costly to hold land in reserve. This does not destroy
the reserve function, but has the effect of pooling reserves
by making it easier for expanding firms to acquire land
through the market when and if they need it.

     With respect to public works and municipal services, we
need to deconsolidate accounting so that separable parts are
analyzed and evaluated separately. This lets us eliminate

cross-subsidy. Then we can apply the logic of marginal cost
pricing without abusing it, as now. We need to foster private
capital that improves land served by public works. Even
though this results in loads on public works, it obviates
extensions to serve the same 1ods further out.
     We need a more positive attitude toward private capital

which supplements and extends public works vertically at
private expense. We need a more negative attitude towards

"pre-emptive :apital" which occupies public land and capital
                         - 49 -
where access is open without adequate price. And we need to
avoid over-delegating public authority over street planning
to large private landholders. Whether the voters are capable

of selecting statesmen capable of rising to this challenge
and laying out streets well will always be the marginal
question, I fear. But the alternative is a collection of

tracts, company towns and planned unit developments which
will never make a synergistic city, or a democracy either.

     With respect to interpersonal equity, once we make
efficiency a goal we can reconcile it with most ideas of

equity (which are subjective). We should never imagine that
partial equity (as for instance by avoiding slum clearance or
giving cheap water to favored individuals) could add up to
anyone's notion of general equity in the whole economy as a

total system. It is better to let efficiency prevail and use
taxes to make compensatory equitable payments in money, rather
than give in kind specific things to a limited few consumers,
Land taxation lets us do this without impairing incentives.

Land taxation is, indeed, essential to let cities plan public
works efficiently: by recouping the benefits to some land-
owners through the tax mechanism, we avoid wasting subeconomic

services on others who exact this as the price for political

support. The alternative is logrolling, pork-barreling,
uneconomical public works extension, and corruption.
     Land taxation helps reduce urban alienation in three

ways: it minimizes. the division of haves and have-nots by
taxing the haves to support government; it actuates landowners

to use their land, thus, second, giving jobs to the landless
                         — 50 -

and, third, rendering services to them. It discourages
absentee holding and encourages the resident holder, who
participates more in community affairs.

     RedistributiVe payments need not distort efficient

location incentives if they are paid directly to individual

citizens in cash, rather than being routed through govern-

ments and/or paid in kind.

     With respect to zoning and land use regulation, the

need for these is minimized by application of the other
principles suggested. We should retain zoning but limit it

to maximizing joint values, having purified the motives of
local officials by distributing social dividends directly to

people, not to local governments. Zoning is a poor substitute
for direct action against pollution and nuisance and overuse

of the public wealth, all of which sapping is better purged

by user charges, direct prohibitii" and regulations. We
should minimize edge conflicts among incompatible land uses

by encouraging compact sequential expansion. We should also
encourage intensification, which is growth without expansion.
     We will still not have the City of God on earth. Contra-
dictions and unresolved value questions will always remain.

We are dealing, underneath it all, with the most central
social dilemma, how to maintain a healthy society in a sick

world without being overwhclirici by immigrants. Part of the
answer lies in healing the sick world, and part of the cure
would be the demonstration effect of our own good example.
Show how immigrants can be used to strengthen a society, and

others will ñlow suit. Another part of the answer lies in
                           - 51 -
the increased need to save energy and other resources. The
synergistic city is resource-conserving. The rest of the
answer, whatever it may be, merits our sustained pursuit in

order to secure the enormous advantages of urban civilization

in the synergistic city.
                         FOOTNOTES

1. Real Estate Research Corporation,       Costs of Sprawl,
    prepared for The Council on Environmental Quality,
    (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 197)4.).
    New York Regional Planning Association, Sprawl City,
    (N.Y.: The R.P.A., 1962). State of California, Office
    of Planning and Research, Urban Development Strategy for
    California, (Sacramento: Office of Planning and Research,
      1977).

2. William Alonso, "The Economics of Urban Size," Papers of
    the Regional Science Association, Vol. XXVI, 1971,
    pp. 67-83, at p. 72.
3. cf., Matthew Edel, Economies (sic) and the Environment
    (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice—Hall Inc., 1973),
      pp. 112-33.
4. Wilbur Thompson, "The City as a Distorted Price System,"
      c. 1970.

 5.   Paul Downing (ed.), Local Service Pricing Policies and
      their Effect on Urban Spatial Structure, (Vancouver:
      University of B.C. Press, 1977).
6. Jon Udell, Social and Economic Consequences of the Merger
    Movement in Wisconsin, (Madison: Graduate School of
    Business, 1969J. Mason Gaffney, "Social and Economic
    Impacts of Foreign Investment in U.S. Land," Natural
    Resources Journal, Vol. 17(3), July, 1977, pp. 377—94.
 7. Joseph Monsen, "Who Owns the City," Land Economics,
     Vol. XXXVII(2), May, 1961, pp. 174-77.

 8. Frank Michelman, "Property, Utility, and Fairness,"
     Harvard Law Review, Vol. 80(6), April, 1967, pp. 1165-
     1258, p. 1223. Robert Ellickson has elaborated on this
     in his "Suburban Growth Controls," Yale Law Journal,
     Vol. 86(3), pp. 385-511, (January, 1977).
 9. Among hundreds of works here are a few. Shaw Livermore,
     Early American Land Companies (N.Y.: The Commonwealth
     Fund, 1939). Paul Gates, Frontier Landlords and Pioneer
     Tenants, (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1945).
     L.C. Gray, "Land Specu1atior.." in Encyclopedia of the
     Social Sciences, E. Selirnan, ed. (N.Y.: The Macmillan
     Co., 1931). Ray Billington, Westward Expansion, (N.Y.:
      The Macmillan Co.., 1949).

10. Welch, Finis and Robert Evenson, "Farm Income and its
     Taxation: Evidence of Gross Inequities," unpublished
     manuscript.
11. USDL: 77—369. Press release April 27, 1977.
12. James W. Thompson and Edgar N. Johnson, An Introduction
     to Medieval Europ, (N.Y.: W.W. Norton & Co., 1937),
     pp. 293-95,
