YEARBOOK SEPARATE No. 2931
Reprinted from pages 503—522 of the 1958

Yearbook of Agriculture

Urban expansion will
it ever stop? This essay raises thought-provoking

questions, contains many challenging details, and steps on some
toe. It will arouse disagreement and maybe controversy. Everyone will do well to attend closely to the compelling problems it
discusses of harnessing urban land—a resource that "holds eco.

nomic forces of titanic power for welfare or destruction." By
M. Mason Gaffney, associate professor of agricultural economics,
the University of Missouri.
WHEN YOU walk down Main Street in whose abundance gives the slack to
any large city, each step takes you past allow flexibility of operations, meet
several thousand dollars' worth of emergency needs, and afford the innofrontage. Frontage is a common meas- vator endless possible combinations of
ure of city land, and it goes by the skills and resources to experiment with.

foot, like a precious commodity. A

front foot is a foot along the sidewalk
with a strip behind it 100—150 feet to
the rear of the lot. A foot on the right
street is worth whole farms.
Among the clearest is State Street in
Chicago, where some frontage goes for
30 thousand dollars a foot. At that rate
an acre would bring 13 million dollars.
Market Street in San Francisco runs
up to io thousand dollars a foot. A foot
on Fayetteville Street in Raleigh, N. C.,
is worth about 4 thousand dollars.

The city is a convenient gathering

place where buyers can rely on finding
sellers, and sellers buyers—a place to
inspect, compare, and exchange goods

and render and receive services. Its

large local market attracts a variety of
specialized goods and services. Its com-

pactness permits cheap distribution,
which in turn facilitates savings from
large-scale central operations.

It is a central store of information

and ideas—a place to confer and arbitrate face to face, to plan and adminisWhy do these strips of otherwise ter, to do research and educate It is a
common dirt command such prices? place where many minds can associate
The answer lies in the forces of urban freely to stimulate, evaluate, and diffuse new techniques and ideas: In all,
centralization.
Urban land, which serves a region the brain, control, and power center of
much as the farmstead serves a farm, society.
Urban land commands a premium,
is a central storage base for collecting
too,
as a place to reside. For living, as
and distributing outputs and inputs
and for sorting, processing, and reas- for business, its advantage is access to
a wide selection of opportunities and
sembling them.

•

•

It is a center that affords easy, re- associations.
Although it need not be fertile, or
liable access to enough volume and
variety of resources to supply complex, flat, or even dry, good urban land is
specialized, continuous, and large-scale scarce. The value of land for urban
functions depends on its location relative to transportation, resources, and
It is a reservoir of goods and labor markets. Large-scale producers attach

operations, and enough markets to absorb their outputs and byproducts.
507153—59

503

504

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

a special premium to the best lands, costly land near downtown. Consideras they require access to the widest able space is devoted also to docks, bus
markets for economical operations. Be- terminals, airports, and easements for
ing large, they also require large areas,
so that competition for the best land is
extremely keen.

pipes and wires to.Itransport water, gas,

tral locations, where they assemble and
process many resouices for many mar-

come, but the city can ill afford not to
devote generous spaces to these corri-

tation have obvious merits, as do heads
of navigation and other load-breaking
points.

enormous productive forces inherent in

and electricity. Halls, elevators, and
stairs take space inside buildings.

Most of this spacious network of pubThe entire network of location factors defies simple analysis. But the lie and semipublic lands dedicated to
greatest cities develop at strategic cen- free movement yields little direct in-

kets. Junctions and hubs of transpor- dors, which allow full release of the

Good location is not enough to fit
land for urban functions. Access, the
basic urban resource, is partly manmade. The city enhances its natural
advantages by pushing out routes to
tap wider territories, but that is only

specialization and exchange and give
the private lands their value.
The final essential for productive ifl-ban land is the improvement of adjoin-

ing land. One lonely storehouse no

more makes a city than one smolder-

ing stick makes a fire. Assembled buildings compete for customers, suppliers,
a start. To realize its full potential, the and use of public spaces, but generally
city develops a network of local trans- they also complement each other soãs

portation—a system of general access
through which its lifeblood moves.
So vital is transportation that most
cities devote more than half their developed land to it. In 53 central cities—

"central" meaning the major downtown city of a metropolitan region, excluding suburbs and satellites—which
were studied by Harland Bartholomew
for his book, Land Uses in American Cities,

streets and alleys alone occupied 28
percent of the developed area.
Autos are voracious off-street land

consumers, too. One parking space,

with access lanes and a little to spare
to allow for human weakness, preempts

more than 300 square feet. The driveway and garage on a residential lot
occupy about as much surface as the
house. Many factories occupy less space

than their own parking lots and loading and delivery aprons. The modern,
auto-oriented shopping center allows
4 or 5 square feet of parking for each
square foot of floor area. Filling stations are almost entirely open space.

to enhance enormously their overall

productive value.
For the essence of urban value is access, and every resource the city adds

increases the volume and variety of
resources accessible to all. Each netv
seller is a magnet for more buyers.
Each buyer is a magnet for sellers,
pulling trade from farther away, attracting more transportation routes and
scheduled runs, and helping establish
the city as the place to rely on finding
what you want, selling your wares and
services, and, in a dynamic, competitive world, keeping touch with the latest products, information, techniques,
and ideas.

Each addition to the local market
helps also to spread the overhead of
more specialized and larger operations.

Each new taxpayer shares the burden
of large public works and improves the
city's credit. Each new producer helps
diversify the city's economic base and

insure its stability. Each new seller
tends either to bring in outside money
or reduce leakages of money to outside

Other forms of transportation are
less demanding, but still they take a sellers, and thus he creates new demand
good deal of land. Railroads took 5 for local services.
A growing city therefore may enjoy
percent of the cities studied by Mr.
a
long
stage of increasing returns, when
Bartholomew, including much very

•

•• •.

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

growth begets more growth. Thus the

505

Inner partitions need not be weatherproof; the outer surface of a cube in-

one best location in a region has a
decisive advantage over the second creases in less proportion than the

best, and the earliest development has space it encloses. So a large, multistory
a commanding lead over later corners. building provides given spac; services,
The largest urban nucleus tends to and access more cheaply than several
snowball, while others shrivel.
small buildings.
There are limits to the economical
The European scholar Georges Widmer has provided an interesting dem- height of buildings and to the amount

onstration of increasing returns in of crowding people will endure, of
urban growth. Widmer worked with course, and everyone knows that a
Swiss census data, and published his conspicuous centrifugal surge started
results in the Revue Economique for some years ago. But nevertheless a city
March 1953. He found a direct rela- keeps its basic cohesive tendencies,
tionship between size of city and several which are its reason for being.
measures of per capita economic activity, such as wages and tax revenues.

A limit to increasing returns is the
• cost of transportation. The larger the
city grows, the farther it has to range
for markets and materials. And many
cities are stopped short of this limit by
the city fathers' fears of spoiling their

JUST HOW LARGE an area cities Oc-

cupy no one knows, for no one can
say where a city ends. The United
States Census defines "urbanized areas"

roughly as those in and around cities

of at least o thousand inhabitants.

That was about 8 million acres in 1950,

evenly divided between the central
on public works, raising wages and cities and their urbanized fringes.
• taxes, admitting outsiders, spoiling the Eight million acres equals the area of
markets, lowering rents, risking money

fishing, or losing control of city hail.
But a number of metropolitan titans
have burst these bonds to accumulate
a large share of the population, capital,
and the land value of the country. New

Maryland and Delaware, 0.42 percent
of the continental United States, and
a little less than the 9 million acres in
farmsteads. It seems a modest space
requirement for its 70 million residents,

york City (excluding suburbs and particularly the 50 million in central

satellites) in 1955 had about 7.8 mu- cities.
The census has been conservative in
li6n people (4.8 percent of our popu• lation), and its annual real-estate taxes its definition, for the area enclosed inwere 746 million dollars, 7 percent of side farfiung urban outposts would be
much greater. Eight million acres is
the national levy.

the area of a circle with a 63-mile
THE GRAVITATIONAL pull of a city radius, or two circles with 45-mile

radii, and stray bits from any one of
of gravity, the downtown district of our metropolitan giants may be found
does not stop at its fringes. The center

that far from its center.
But even the census' limited area is
in upon itself, story on story. In this
focusing of demand, the city finds fur- urbanized only in a loose sense. Despite
ther increasing returns from large-scale the advantages of compact land use,
central cities themselves are surprisbuilding.
The most economical layout to inter- ingly patchy. In Mr. Bartholomew's 53
connect given space users is in three central cities, the undeveloped portion
dimensions, in which central heating was about 29 percent. Although his
maximum access, draws the whole city

and other utilities can be distributed surveys are not all up to date, many
over shorter conduits than in two di- local planning surveys show compamensions and each room has quicker rable figures after 1955.
His developed urban land was about
access to most of the others. One roof
and one foundation serve many stories. o.o6 acre per capita, or 5 yards on a

506

football gridiron. At that density, the
50 million inhabitants of central cities
of more than 50 thousand use nearer 3
million acres than 4 million.
• Even some of that 3 nlilhion acres
they "use" only in a poetic sense. It is
mostly open space. The area actually
covered by buildings is probably less

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

digious. It is easy, to underestimate
them because of the comparatively
modest space requirements of cities
There is nothing modest about the
prices of urban land, however.
Residential lots in respectable estab-'
lished neighborhoods sell for 50 dollars
to 250 dollars a foot and for more than

than 400 thousand acres, less than 500 dollars a foot along a few gold

some western ranches and less than 15 coasts. Apartment sites average hghér,
percent of the developed area of the going above i thousand dollars along
Lake Shore Drive in Chicago. Slum
central cities.
No one expects that every building sites are often held at, fancy prices
should occupy 100 percent of its site, because of an expectation, of future

but just how big a yard and grounds

should be so as to be designated as developed by a building somewhere on it

industrial, commerical, or public dernand. Some subsidiary shopping districts sell for i thousand dollars a fOot.

is a puzzle. Some urban buildings do The best industrial sites in large cenoccupy their entire sites, and by con- tral cities command well over . too
• trast such other sites as the 75. acres thousand dollars an acre.
Prices of land out from the 'center
around Ford's new administration
are
much lower, but still impressive,
building in Dearborn seem nearer
akin to undeveloped lands. No one can especially after the multifold increases
say exactly how we are to designate since i 950. Undeveloped residential or
such lands, but some sort of allowance industrial land along new superhighwould certainly reduce the central ways was bringing several thousánd
cities' land "use" appreciably below 3 dollars an 'acre in 1957, and more
million acres.

around New York City." Industrial

If the central city is a little patchy, acreage near Eastshore Freeway, Oakits outskirts are in shreds. Here, to be land, averaged 10,500 dollars as early
sure, are big users of land like golf as 1953. Potential sites of shopping

courses, dumps, drive-ins, and air- centers brought io thousand to 50
ports, serving the central city. But it thousand dollars an acre, as did motel
would be hard to define any segment sites near . the better interchanges of
of this nebulous territory that was not
largely in weeds. Probably less than
half the 4 million acres of urban fringe
cited in the census deserves to be called

"developed."

For cities under 50 thousand, our
data are progressively less detailed.

the new turnpikes and thruways.
Airspace above the golden ground of

the city also carries high price tágs
An option on air over the Pennsyl-.
vania Railroad tracks in New York
specified more than 3 million dollars

an acre in 1955. A Times Square billHugh H. Wooten and James R. board brings i thousand a year.
At such prices, it does not take many
Anderson, of the Department of Agricities
to outvalüe all the farms in whole
culture, estimated that all cities of
more than a thousand inhabitants in States, and in most States one or a few
1954 occupied i8.6 million acres— of the largest cities do. New York City.
was worth some unabout the area of South Carolina and real estate in i

i percent of the continental United known but large amount over . its

States. Smaller communities may oc- assessed valuation of 20 billion dollars,
cupy another io million acres. But all which was the current market value of
these figures include empty spaces, all the farm real estate in New York
which make up larger portions of the State and i other Eastern States. For
the whole country, urban values exsmallcr cities.
As to urban values, they are pro- ceed farm values several times over.

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

507

It may even be that urban values real estate, especially rented slum and
exceed farm values per capit. One vacant land, that are most frequently
cannot be certain. Land prices swing

violently and rapidly, yet the only

general source of data on urban values
is from moss-covered tax assessments.
Urban assessments are more obsolete

found to be underassessed.
One might reason that city tax rates

must be higher because city property
pays city taxes on top of county taxes—
although, of course, the most urbanized

than rural assessments—if that is counties might have lower overall

rates than predominantly rural counBut we do know how much taxes ties. City People get more local governproperty pays. It may surprise some mental services, it is true, but they get
farmers to learn that farm property them cheaper because they live closer
taxes are less per capita than nonfarm together. They also have more nonproperty taxes—roughly 54 dollars, property-tax sources of revenue.
compared to 72 dollars in 1956. Of
Then, too, a census study under
some 11.7 billion dollars levied that Allen Manvel found farm real estate
possible.

year, farm property bore only i .2 overassessed—hence overtaxed by the
billion dollars.
The higher urban levies might reflect
higher urban tax rates, rather than per

capita values. The average rate on

farm real estate, as reported in 1957
by the Agricultural Finance Review,
was about i percent of market value.

There is a general impression that

counties—relative to urban real estate
in i 01 counties of downstate Illinois in
1946. Arthur Wairath found the same
in several counties around Milwaukee

in 1955. Remember, too, that an appreciable share of urban real estate is
tax-exempt institutional ground.
None of these studies provides a solid

urban real rates average higher—and basis for estimating urban real-estate
some evidence to back it up. David values. The United States Census of
Rowlands, of the University of Penn- Governments planned to release in
sylvania, in a report on the Property 1958 what should be a definitive study
Tax in Atlanta and Other Large Cities, of tax assessment ratios. Even that
estimated effective tax rates in 20 omits tax-exempt real estate from conlarge cities for 1956. Only 2 of them fall sideration, and also it omits suburban
under i percent, and a few exceed 2 acreage, but still it may provide the
first firm estimate of urban real-estate
percent.
On the other hand, a study pub- values in the United States.

lishd in the Review of Economics

Meanwhile, we have reasonable
grounds for putting the real rate of
otherwise Scott Maynes and James urban property taxation between i
and Statistics for February 1957 found

• Morgan, analyzing voluminous ques- and 2 percent, which means the aggretionnaire data from the University of. gate value of urban real estate is of the

Michigan Survey of Consumer Fi-

nances and the United States Census
Residential Financing Survey, found
the real rate of property taxation on
owner-occupied urban residences in
1953 to be nearly i percent.
They did not check the possibility
that respondents may have tended to
understate their taxes. Nor did they

order of seven or eight times greater
than farm real estate. It is entirely possible that a i 00-percent comprehensive
reckoning, including tax-exempt hold-

ings and suburban acreage, would
reach as high as io times farm values,
or i trillion dollars.

• Other indirect evidences of realestate values are the mortgages they

discover to what extent the low tax carry. As of September i
the farm
rates on• owner-occupied residences mortgage debt was i o billion dollars,
resulted from homestead exemption, compared to 143 bill jon dollars on
which would not apply to other classes nonfarm residential and commercial
of real estate. Still, it is other classes of

real estate. Nonfarm real estate in 1957

508

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

probably carried a higher ratio of miss land value as a minor part of urdebt to value—it is impossible to say
for certain because most real estate is

ban real-estate value, especially if we
include vacant lands at their current

however, nonfarm mortgage figures do
not include the debt on industrial, rail,

share. And, interestingly enough, the

unmortgaged. On the other hand, market prices. It may even be the larger
ratio of land to building values tends to

or utility holdings, or on institutional
and public real estate.

be highest in the centers of large, densely

urban families occupy dwellings valued

touch with the land most completely.

billion dollars..

their rapid outward thrust. Urban values being what they are, cities gobble
up farmland at will. There is no accurate survey of the wide and ragged ur-

populated, and built-up cities, where

Several studies also indicate that economic life is supposed to have lost

at two to three times their annual incomes. This suggests that urban residences alone are worth more than 500

These last two lines of reasoning

A STRIKING ASPECT of today's cities is

yield no definite numerical estimates
of urban values, but they do confirm ban frontier, but various estimates, sugthe belief that they dwarf the value of gest it has been advancing, recently
about 400 thousand acres a year.it'ito
farm real estate.
Real estate is more than land, of the heart of America's farmlands)
Is this in the farmers' interest? Many
course, and conceivably urban realthoughtful
observers are raising voices
estate values inhere largely in the
buildings—we hear a good deal about in alarm for the future. The most vocal
the declining importance of land in an of them seem to think the city should
urban society. That may be a miscon- be contained. There is another side to
the question, though.
ception, however.
The city serves the farmer and buys
Builders putting new single-family
homes on cheap outlying land reckon his products. It is the farmer's interest
the site at one-sixth or one-fifth of the that cities have ample.. land to serve
total cost. But not many urbanites live him well. He would only suffer if he
in new homes on cheap outlying land. were to confine the city into a bottleEven in 1957, after 12 years of record- neck between the barn and the tàble
In fact, the city is all too likely to
smashing construction, 75 percent of
all urban dwelling units were built become a bottleneck, anyway, with no
before 1945 and most of them before help from the farmer—but much to
1929. There are almost no new resi- his detriment.
Because of increasing returns in urdences in older central cities. A study
by the Real Estate Board of New York ban growth, many cities in strategic
in 1953 found that 8o percent of Man- spots have a measure of monopoly
hattan's apartments were more than power over parts of their trade territories. Without the spur of competition,
50 years old.
In fringe areas, where new buildings they are easily tempted to settle back
do outvalue their own sites, a large comfortably and take their customers'
share of the 'sites have no buildings. money without the costs and bother of
Around Cleveland, for example, 57 offering very adequate or modern servpercent of the Cuyahoga County Plan- ice. Their strong position lets them do
ning Commission's "suburban, ring" this simply by vegetating quietly withand 84 percent of the "rural ring" were out necessarily having any active mo-

'
I

vacant in 1954. In commercial districts,. with their majestic frontage
prièes, it takes a new and substantial
structure to match the site value.
All in all, from the limited informa-

tion available, there is no reason to dis-

nopoly motive. Because downtown sites

are favorite investments for absentees
and heiresses, too, a high proportion of

them fall, into ownerships that tend
to resist progressive management and
risky improvements.

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

There is competition within each

509
back door of the Capitol, in defiance of

city, of course, but the city fathers who
are so inclined can minimize it by re-

is the shopping district gravitating

its planner's best-laid schemes There

strictive policies. They may lay out toward a high-income residential area,
streets so as to limit the business front- but radiating influences that create
age; maintain obsolete traffic patterns slums in its van and erode away the

attracting force. Here are sewers withage new buildings by overassessing out houses, while out beyond arise new
them relative to old—a practice that houses without sewers. There is hardly
has become especially common since any predicting where the construction
the war—and assessing undeveloped crews will turn up next.
What are the builders seeking?
land at next to nothing; zoning out
More space? There is considerable
new developments; limiting the height
of buildings; winking at tax-delinquent unused space in the central city itself.
Lower taxes? Fringe residents, scatland speculators and selling off foretered
broadcast with more schoolclosed properties only slowly; fostering
children
per capita and without the
obstructive building codes; endowing
tax-free institutions with grounds vastly downtown commerce and industry to
beyoId their needs; neglecting essen- share tax burdens, in general must pay
tial public works and services; and re- more taxes to finance given municipal
fusing to act decisively against obso- services.
by Amos H. Hawley
lescence and blight.
Surveys in
and
Basil
G.
Zimmer,
of the University
Whether by design, apathy, or sincere devotion to an obsolete tradition, of Michigan, found fringe residents
probably most cities contrive to remain around Flint, Mich., actually more
inadequately developed to serve fully willing than residents of the central
city to assume higher taxes. And it is
the demands on them.
To protect themselves, the farmers' evident that many people flee central
to protect vested investments; discour-

best assurance of adequate, modern,
and competitive urban services may be
to release lands for new development

around stagnant central cities. With

cities in search of better schools and
other costly public services that the
city fathers are too parsimonious to
finance.

Freedom from traffic? The farther
duce new competition for farm trade. one lives from jobs and markets the
The urban expansion bears critical more traffic he must buck in between.
Freedom from restrictive policies?
watching, however.
Are efficient cities evolving—cities Often so—yet many suburban enthat distribute goods with minimum claves become more restrictive than
the central city.
time, motion, and cost?
Of the many, many things that urAre cities swallowing much more
ban refugees are seeking, most are to
farmland than they need?
Above all, does the present pattern of be found in the central city. The refuurban expansion contain the same ele- gees want municipal services, access to
ments of instability that have brought social and economic opportunities, and
most previous land booms to collapse? other urban advantages—but not at
To answer these questions, it is nec- any price. To oversimplify a complex
essary to analyze the process of urban politico-socio-economic phenomenon,
urban outmigrants, like the westward
expansion more closely.
all its faults, such expansion does intro-

Like the eager suitor who leaped pioneers before them, are seeking
onto his hbrse and dashed madly off cheap land. The very advantages of
in all directions, the city moves out the city prove its major liability when
hither and yon with little apparent they promote asking prices so high as
consistency or reason. Here is Wash- to drive builders out of town.
The quest for cheap land leads the
ington, D. C., growing out from the

510

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE i968

city not just to expand, but to disinte- nated tangle. Commerce bypasses old
grate. The quest turns very much on bottlenecks but meets an obstacle
the individual seller. Asking prices for course that consumes untold time and
comparable lands vary widely with motion and can hardly avoid reflecting
the seller's finances, tax position, infor- itself, among other ways, in a wider
mation, sentiments, or just plain cus- farm-market spread.
Such coherent patterns as do emerge
sedness. Jack Lessinger, of the University of California's Real Estate Re- are geometrically imperfect. Some varsearch Program, has found tentatively iation on a linear theme, strung out
that in the Santa Clara Valley, around miles along a railway, waterways or
San Jose, it is the smaller farmers who highway, is commonest. But why go 20
succumb earliest to the city, and miles west when there is open land 5
larger landholders who hold out long- miles north? It takes three-dimensional
est. The French geographers, M. development to afford maximum ac-

••

Phlipponneau, J. Tricart, and C. cess at minimum cost among given

Precheur, describe the same tendency users of space. Linear developments do
around Nancy and Paris. Buyers find a not even use two dimensions, but force
bargain here, another yonder, and all traffic along one long, congested
build accordingly, so that develop- line. That, often as not, was built origment proceeds in patches and freckles. inally for through traffic.
One can probably understand how
State highway builders can stretch
funds much further where the right-of- linear patterns develop: Cities fail
way is cheap. Besides, holders of to provide adequate two-dimensional
cheap land are less likely to band into street networks; and interurban trunk
militant "Property Owners' Protective lines, financed by the State or National
Leagues" and the like to block new Government, offer ready-built, openthruways; and railroads are just as ended avenues of escape to cheap, achappy to see highway funds diverted cessible land. Landholders along existto routes not paralleling their own. ing routes can subdivide without dediNew highways, like railroads before cating 25 percent of their land for
them, often tend to bypass congested streets and without submitting to cenareas and develop earliest and most tral controls over subdivision plans.
fully in less settled territory. They open But to explain is not to justify
Our second question was: "Do cities
wide new areas to hunt-and-peck deneed
to swallow so much good farmvelopment and establish new urban
land?"
nuclei where they converge.
We should probably concede the city
These outlying nuclei are bases from
which even farther flung developments first choice over the best land, even the
are launched. Especially along• trunk most fertile, just as farmers concede
routes, they coalesce into gangling, corn first choice of the best wheatland.
diffuse urban complexes that some It may not make much sense to farm
writers, fancy running free, are de- steep slopes in the Ozarks, but it would
scribing as "polynucleated urbs," "co- make less sense to put St. Louis there,
nurbations," "cities as long as: high- to put Minneapolis in the north woods,
ways," "atomic megalopolises," and and so on. But this hardly settles the

"scrambled eggs" and hailing, with
enthusiasm or resignation, as forerunners of a new era.

Our first question was, "Are they

efficient cities?" By any ideal standard
they are not.

Transportation and utility lines to
join the scattered pieces cost billions.
The result at best is a poorly coordi-

'1:.

question.

Cities, even central cities, are not

using nearly the land they already con-

tain. These undigested pieces are of
negative value to the city itself Cities
exist to bring people together. Vacant
and underdeveloped lands keep them
apart and thus destroy part of the city's

basic resources: Cheap distribution

•

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

511

and easy access. Even if land had no
alternative use in farming. it would

To qualify for capital gains treatment, the speculator must establish

pay many a city to draw itsell together.
.Dispersioii also forces heavier re—

ness,'' but is a passive "investor,"

liancc on those hungry land gobblers,

that lie is not "in the real—estate busi—

neither improving land for sale nor

automobiles and trucks. Their de-

soliciting buyers. Or he may establish
mands for highway, turning, and park- that he is "using the land in his trade
ing space displace tens of thousands of or business'' (other than real estate).
Should he lose on one sale he can
dwelling units a year, scatter the city
out farther, and consume more farm- offset the loss against other capital.
land. Dispersion requires that each gains. Better yet, if lie establishes that
plant, far from the storehouses and he is using the land in his trade or

services of the central city, be more business, he can offset losses against
seif-sufilcient, which of course increases ordinary income, even though any
gains would not be taxed as such.
Still better, if it is his residence that
It is especially out from the center,
though, that cities preempt vast lands he sells, and he puts the proceeds into
its space requirements.

they do not use and may never use.
Little urban fragments, prospering

busily among fields and orchards, excite speculative hopes, for land sales
around and between them until urban
price influence extends millions of acres

beyond the city limits.
Urban prices have a baleful influence
on farming. The dirt farmer has strug-

gle enough financing title to lands
priced by their anticipated income
from agriculture alone. Urban prices

push him out of the market com-

pletely. Landholders near cities must
be speculators as well as farmers.

Often they are not farmers at alL

High-priced lands in areas with urban
possibilities tend to gravitate to those
who have the financial power to wait.
Urban financial power is something
few working farmers can match.
Federal income-tax laws tend to aggrwate the dirt farmer's disadvantage,
for they make speculative gains especially attractive to those in higher tax
brackets. To begin, any interest and
local taxes are fully deductible. Then
the speculator may qualify for "capital
gains" treatment—that is, for excluding 50 percent of any realized incre-

a new residence within the year, the

entire gain is tax free—and with a little

effort a commuter may learn to "reside" over a considerable investment.
Best of all, one who buys land years
ahead of his own needs never pays a
tax on the rise of value so long as he.
does not sell—something many large
corporations, with huge reserves "for
expansion," have little expectation of
doing. Wilbur Steger, writing in the
National Tax Journal for September
1957, estimates that 90 percent of all
capital gains were thus left tax free.
from igoi to 1949.

The result of all this is a virtual

scorched-earth policy for many lands
around cities. Why risk any improvement or overt sales effort that might
land you "in the real-estate business"
and thus disqualify your increments
from "capital gains" treatment? Why

not hoard up vast industrial estates
for "future expansion"? Should your
alleged need actually eventuate and if
the value of the land has gone up in
the meantime, you will have achieved
a kind of tax-free income. Should you

sell, you can probably get capital-gains
treatment for increnients and ordinary
ment from taxable income, with a offset for any losses.
For lands that do remain farmed, the
maximum tax rate of 25 percent on the
increment. That is of great value to the influence of urban prices often means

man in an 8o-percent tax bracket and a wasting away of farm fertility and
tends to make him a high bidder in capital.
Dr. Lessinger has documented this
the market for appreciating suburban
phenomenon
in his dissertation, The
lands.
5O713—9—2

512
Determination of Land Use in Rural Urban
Transition Areas (Berkeley, Calif., 1956).

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

contained in 6 circles with 45-mile radii; or 24 circles with 22-mile radii; or
120 circles with io-mile radii. As small

Around expanding San Jose, Calif.,
prune and apricot orchards are deteri- a city as Eugene, Oreg., extends its
orating as the city infiltrates the Santa price influence more than io miles
Clara Valley. He analyzes the age dis- from the center (not around a full cirtribution and bearing condition of or- cle), but there are 340 cities in the
chards in different zones around the country larger than Eugene and the
city and finds deterioration of orchards price influence of some of themradiclosely related to anticipations of ates more than 50 miles. If that were
urban demand, as reflected in land not enough, there are thousands of
prices.

smaller towns. A careful survey would

farm long before actually putting it to
urban use. To a degree this is economical: Farm improvements are wasted
on lands marked for immediate urbanization. But Dr. Lessinger's studies in-

population •of the United States the

acres—the area of California—under
the influence of urban prices.,.
The answer to our second question,
then, is that cities are taking and leaving undeveloped more farmland than
they need.
This raises the third question: "Can
urban expansion continue?" Or have
the onrushing urban armies overextended their lines and lost themseves
in agriculture's defense in depth?
Many writers since 1955 have been
projecting trends of the past io years

ing along the Atlantic, Pacific, and

public-utility building. Most of it is

Thus the city takes land from the probably show at least ioo million

dicate that urban prices, with their

blighting influence on agriculture, already extend over an area of the Santa

Clara Valley well beyond any likely
urban demand. Is this a general condition throughout the United States?
Suppose we allow the entire nonfarm

.4

luxury space standards of Winnetka, a forward another 20 years or so and
Chicago suburb. With a golf course, viewing with alarm the startling inspacious parklands, playfields, beaches, roads on farmland. History. warrants
wide, tree-lined streets, two railroad few things less than it does projecting
rights-of-way, large lots and yards, pri- land booms far into the future.. Cities
vate driveways and two-car garages, typically have . expanded in waves.
May we expect the present wave to
estate districts, and almost no apartbreak
and recede?
ments, Winnetka has o.i6 acre of deThis also is a prospect to view with
veloped land per resident—--far more
than the o.o6 acre in the 53 central alarm. The enormous financial impact
cities that Mr. Bartholomew surveyed. of urban expansion is a vital element
At the Winnetka standard, an urban of our prosperity. New construction,
population of 150 million would re- excluding farm and military construcquire 24 million acres—about the area tion, has been running around some
of Indiana—which we can safely take 40 billion dollars annual1y That is
nearly 12 percent of the national inas beyond any foreseeable demand.
The ccregionai cities" that enthusiasts come. It consists mainly of residential,
are envisioning and promoters are tout- commercial, industrial, highway, and

around established cities) by the sim-

tied closely to urban expansion.
The role of construction in sustaining
the flow of spending is greater than its
volume alone would suggest. A good'
deal of purchasing power in most years.
leaks out of the circular flow of spend-

plest count exceed that 24 million acres
by a wide margin.
Twenty-four million acres would be

offset each year by new investment to

gulf coasts, the Great Lakes, dozens of
State freeways and turnpikes, resurgent

inland waterways, and anticipated

Federal-program superhighways (along

with a more conventional accretion

ing into savings and allowances for,
depreciation. The leakages must be

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

513:

avoid a multiple decline in national by the trailside. Will future historians
income.

A decline of annual investment un-

shake their heads sadly over the "second automobile bubble," as today they
do over the first, and over the "canal

der most conditions will produce a
multiple decline in national income fever," "plank-road delirium," and

because consumption spending, which "railroad mania" of the past?
Perhaps—but, on the other hand,
declines when income declines, is also
history
is under no iron necessity to
a creator of money income. Lower inrepeat
itself.
Optimists who seem to
vestment means lower income. Lower
income means lower consumption. believe that collapse is unlikely today
That in turn means still lower income— cite several reasons: Increasing popuand so on through several stages.
lation; strengthened monetary and
Autonomous declines in consumption banking regulation and insurance;

would have similar multiple effects,

Federal willingness and ability to

but consumption usually is a relatively

spend; longer term, fully amortizable
mortgages; more prudent subdividing

passive factor, which economists are
inclined to treat as primarily a func-

practices; large private holdings of
tion of income itself. Investment is liquid assets; and other reassuring
more independent and temperamental

phenomena.

Of the investment on which so much
hinges, 40 billion dollars of construction spending is a large share. It is also

while questioning more closely the sta-

private investment is mostly in less dur-

THE DYNAMIC PROCESS of overexpan-

These are not completely tranquila variable, and probably most econizing,
however, in light of the cocksure
omists would agree that maintaining
national income is in large part a optimism that has preceded and even
problem of maintaining investment accompanied—yes, even followed—
great crashes of the past. It is worthspending.

bility of forces that lead cities to preempt lands beyond their needs.

the most independent share. Other

able goods—machinery, equipment, sion seems to be a complex urban,
and inventories. Replacement and variation on a familiar problem of
turnover of these are passive functions

of time and income to some extent.
Other public spending is mostly relatively .rigidly committed.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE third criti-

cal question is equaled by the difficulty
of answering it.

On one hand, cities have rarely ex-

panded rapidly without tragedy—
neither, for that matter, has agriculture. We have experienced land development booms along wagon roads,

agricultural land settlement.

The process in simplest outline is
this: New demand raises land prices;
supply responds slowly but massively;

high prices over the long period of

response ultimately stimulate more new.
supply than the demand can absorb.

Supply responds very slowly to demand because the process of converting land to urban use involves many
steps by several slowly moving, poorly
coordinated, frequently reluctant and
sometimes downright obstructive pub-

canals, steamboat channels, plank lic and private agents and because it
roads, steam railways, horse railways,
cable carlines, trolleys, subways, elevated railroads, and motor highways,
with townsite and subdivisions prolif-

usually takes land speculators a long
time to release or develop most of the
sites for actual service.

Say a new State-financed freeway
erating on every hand. Most of the begins the process of bringing farmland into an urban market. Besides
booms busted.
The<tlisasters of 1819, 1836, 1857, transportation, the land needs water,
1873, 1893, and 1929 greet the tourist storm and sanitary sewers, telephone,
through history like bones bleaching gas, electric power, schools, fire and

514.

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958.

police protection, and sidewalks, to

Ralph Barnes and George Ray-

most of them from trunklines out

1955, that such municipal policies

to extend their lines and networks to
individual parcels. Landholders must
decide it is time to receive them—that
usually means subdividing, dedicating

urbs, have actually increased the .mini—

name some elementary items.
monci, New York planning consultNot only are many services needed. ants, warn in the Journal of the AmeriSeveral steps must be taken to extend can Institute of Planners for spring

through forks and branches to the ulti- have become more restrictive than
mate distributive tracery that finally even the communities' parochial self-.
brings service to each parcel of land. interests would dictate. New Canaan
Governments and utilities must decide and Greenwich, Conn., New York sub-

mum size of building lot to 4 acres in
some sections, in the most congested

metropolitan area in the United

lands for streets and casements for States. Mountain Lakes, N. J., has
utilities, often paying for part of the gone so far as to buy up a large share
utility extensions and Street improve- of its land to forestall building.

ments, and perhaps being annexed

and saddled with municipal taxes.
It would be nice for each party involved if all the others would commit
themselves to development before he
did—or at least when he does. Then he
need only pluck the ripe fruit from the

Now scarcity breeds substitution,,

and while supply is thus developing so
dilatorily in areas most logically destined for urban growth, the impatient

demand probes outward. It finds a

warm welcome in many outlying cornmunities that have urban aspirations.
tree, instead of undergoing years of Some of them even offer subsidies, tax
risk, interest, depreciation, and obso- favors, and sites to woo industries.
lescence while he waits for compleMoreover, a large share of building
mentary investments to help his own is outside any incorporated area. The,
pay out. The situation lends itself to a Sacramento housing market is an exlong impasse of "after-you-my-dear- treme instance. An unpublished report

of the Federal Housing Administration, dated April 1957, states that 8o
percent of all private dwelling units
gaining and jockeying.
The final step—actual building on authorized there from 1954 through
prepared lots—may be as slow as the 1956 were outside incorporated areas.
others, for there are still the lot specuThese latter-day pioneers demand
lators to wait out. Even when all utilities, which often are willing to
utilities are in, there is a further rise to come if the customers are there first,
speculate on as homes, stores, church- especially if rival sellers are within

Alphonse." At every stage, there is
inertia, nostalgia, fear, and long bar-

striking distance and if regulatory.
We are also witnessing a sort of commissions let them ' balance any

es, and so on make a community.

losses with higher rates charged to all.
scale. Many metropolitan suburbs their customers. The 'iiewcomers, also
have incorporated undeveloped land, demand public services, which usually..
which they proceed to overzone out of come where there are votes and a tax
reach of the middle-class market. That base.
Thus the scattering of urban settleis done in hopes that its exclusive tone
will one day attract upper crust resi- ment leads the basic urbanizing disdents who will pay high taxes, hand- tributive networks and services to prosomely support local merchants, and liferate over wider territories than :the
send their few children away to school. ultimate demand can absorb.
Many communities are ready to wait
Just how wide and how empty these
a long time for such profitable territories are is startling to discover.
fellow citizens, even when chances of The New York engineering firm of
Parsons, Brinckerhoff, Hall & Macsuccess are slim.
municipal land speculation on agrand

I

I.

I,,

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

p

515

Donald surveyed land uses and potentialities in connection with its 1953—
1955 report to the San Francisco Bay
Area Rapid Transit Council. It found

The California Water Resources
Board bulletin said that 65 percent

population of the whole State of Cali-

rounding cities, andthe more or less

people—7 to 10 times the Bay area's

Another
survey, Bulletin 87 of
the Regional Planning Association of
New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut, reported the following percentages of suitable. land undeveloped in
some of the counties of metropolitan
New York: Bronx, 9 percent; Kings
(Brooklyn), 44 percent; Richmond, 32
percent; Hudson, 2! percent; Bergen,
54 percent; Westchester, 63 percent;
Fairfield, 8r percent. (They counted
estates of 2 acres and more as "undeveloped.") For the entire 22-County,

of the suitable land was undeveloped

for urban use in the Los Angeles hydro-

ample suitable acreage in the Bay graphic unit—that is, in the city of
area for the entire projected 1990 Los Angeles, the immediately sur-

fornia: 22 million to 3! million urbanized unincorporated lands.
p9pUlàtion of 3 million in 1953—1955.
This is allowing ample areas for recrea-

tion and industry.

The California State Water Re-

sources Board surveyed the area independently in 1955, using aerial photographs, and published the findings in
its Bulletin No. 2. For the 10-county
Bay area metropolitan region, only 15
percent of the suitable urban land, or
iø percent of the gross land area, was

actually developed for urban use in

'955.
In the crowded city of San Francisco
itself, the Water Resources Board survey showed 23 percent of the usable
land was undeveloped in 1955. Along
the Bay side of San Mateo County (the

"Peninsula"), which is often hastily
described as having become "a solid
mass of suburbs," 75 percent was un-

developed. On the Bay side of Alameda County, which includes Oakland and Berkeley, the survey reported
62 percent was undeveloped.

tristate metropolitan region, dotted
from end to end with fragments of

New York City and laced with transportation and utility lines, only 21 percent of the suitable land, or i 6 percent
of the gross land area, was developed
for urban use.
To occupy these vast territories calls
not only for transportation and utility
networks, but also for enormous private investments in autos, trucks, service stations, and the whole complex of
individualized transportation equip-

In the Santa Clara Valley (around ment. This mobilizes consumers to

San Jose), whose "total urbanization" bring their demand to every nook and
is often forecast as imminent, 86 per- cranny of undeveloped territory Scatcent of the suitable land was unde- tered stores, schools, factories, churchveloped for urban use in 1955. The es, and other basic creators of urban
total suitable urban land in this valley, land value also shed their influence on
155 thDusand acres net of streets, the included undeveloped lands.
The unfilled demand pushes upward,
exceeds the area used in 1955 in the
entire Bay area (129 thousand acres, too. The high price of land stimulates
also net of streets). The developed por- more intensive vertical building (and
tions, however, are scattered over the generally closer economy of land) on a
valley floor. By one estimate, 7 square few sites than demand can begin to
absorb over the entire area subject to
miles of postwar subdivisions in
were scattered over 200 square miles urban influence.

of Santa Clara County, with at least
HERE ARE THE MAKINGS of a cycle of
one subdivision in each square mile.
Transportation, and utility networks overexpansion that should come to
are or must someday be extended to light when speculators holding the betmost of these urban islets, and thereby ter lands try to find markets. But a
to the lands among them.

great deal remains unclear.

516

Perhaps some land developers do
plunge ahead under the sole stimulus
of current prices, but it seems doubtful
whether most investors would commit
themselves for long terms without an
eye to the future.
How shall we explain the tenacity of
the speculators who confidently hold
for a rise and the dauntless optimism
of developers, builders, home buyers,
utilities, municipalities, and still more

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

any buildings, being immobile and
fairly specialized, would stand a good
chance of finding themselves obsolete.

The rational gambler therefore may

often prefer to bet on the race from the
sidelines by holding unimproved land,

postponing building until the uncer-

tainties of racing have been resolved.
He thus lessens his district's chances
of victory by retarding its development,

of course, but one individual is not

speculators who invest in growing areas likely to think his influence is great.

in contempt of mounting hoards of
half-urbanized land within the market

The irrational gambler also is a factor—a major one—to consider. With

several contestants running for the
same prize, the average chances of
ONE REASON for surplus development success obviously are not good. Ye

sphere?

is that rival districts and cities race for
position. Racing differs from economic
competition, as usually conceived, in
that races end. Where new population

land prices in each contending district
often seem to run higher than the sta-

tialities, the fixed layout of routes becomes temporarily fluid. During the
developmental period of uncertainty,
several contestants vie enthusiastically
for prized positions in the new pattern

be justified by income from the land.

trade territory from rivals, just as some
cities push out aqueducts to stake out
scarce waters well ahead of need. Because the motive is to secure territory

prices in some areas increase zoo times
within a few blocks.
Just as gamblers who love gambling
for its own sake will bet against a wheel
they know is fixed, land gamblers bi4

tistical probability of success would
warrant, and the sum of the prices over

and transportation are opening and entire developing areas seem to exceed
promising to open new urban poten- considerably what would reasonably

Just why this should happen is a

mystery social scientists are only beginning to probe. Milton Friedman,
of the University of Chicago, and G.
before it freezes.
L. S. Shackle, of Cambridge, England
Because of increasing returns in ur- have developed some interesting hyban development, these positions, once potheses about it. The fact that it does
established, are quite secure and should happen is well established, however.
appreciate in value as outsiders flock Economists of several generations have
to them. So it makes sense for each con- observed, with Alfred Marshall, a retestant to risk great resources in a race nowned Victorian economist, that".
which most of them must lose.
if an occupation offers a few extremely
Cities and districts race by improv- high prizes, its attractiveness is increased
ing themselves to attract trade, routes, out of all proportion to their aggregate
and investments. They push out their value." Certainly the irban land marown routes to capture undeveloped ket is of that description—frontagë

and position quickly before it is too

late, extension of trunklines may pro- • up land prices higher and over more
ceed when the fever is high without area than the possibilities of urban in
much thought for immediately fore- come can justify.
seeable demands.
Perhaps the most powerful stimulant
to demand for land is the emer4
Trade racing also helps explain the
behavior of land speculators. Should a gence of a Maithusian climate of opin
district win its race, it is primarily the ion. Opinion is a powerful agent in the
land that would appreciate, buildings land market because land prices are
being duplicable. But should it lose, based on opinions of the future and be-

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

cause there is so little factual informa-

tion to goon.

517

out several primrose paths by which
opinion falls into these errors.

One is the plausible presumption

Try to find a simple statistic, like the
number of lots subdivided annually in

that construction tends to exhaust the

this information, and few of those include entire metropolitan areas.

masonry seems especially to stir deep

yond the ken of established centers of

editorials, goading investment counsel,

the United States or, indeed, in any supply of urban land. The sight of
region. Few jurisdictions compile even childhood haunts covered with fresh

Maithusian anxieties that find their
Urban outskirts especially are be- way into poignant articles, indignant

information—and it is in these far and finally urgent land hoarding that
reaches that the greatest excesses have transcends prosaic computations of

occurred in the past. There might be supply and demand.
Yet construction urbanizes as much
enough land prepared and preparing
for urban use to swamp a metropoli- land as it consumes, or more. Even if
tan market for •20 years, and it is doubt- a city grew in a compact circle, the

ful if more than a few real-estate men, ring around its widening circumference
who are not given to broadcasting such would grow ever larger, roughly with
gloom, would be aware. Not until June the square of its radius. And because
1957 has there been any semblance cities scatter out alhver the landscape,
of an inventory for the Nation. That, building (especially of roads and utility
compiled as part of the study of urban networks) brings wide supplies of new
tax assessments by the Census of Gov- land into the urban market.
ernments, does not purport to tell anyAnother primrose path is the equally
thing about the lots other than that plausible presumption that skyrocketing land prices reflect an acute scarcity
they are "of record."
We have no systematic data at all on of urban land. But this is to reckon
more difficult but equally important without the vast supplies held in cold
questions, such as the trend of land storage by speculators and holdouts of
prices, the number of unrecorded and one kind and another. The economist's
illegally subdivided urban sites, the nightmare of inflation without full emareas in various stages of partial urban- ployment of resources has characterization, plans for impending redevel- ized land markets toward the close of
opment, and so on.
every boom period.
• Land developers must grope to deThere also seems to be a tendency to
cisions primarily by the present feel of underestimate the regenerative power
the market, without factual basis for and absorptive capacity of downtown.

the longer sighted analysis that is so
essential to an activity whose product

There is no denying that autos and
trucks, unbound by central terminals

is as nearly permanent as anything and fixed routes, have made it more feaproduced by man.

sible to bypass downtown and thus have

drastically weakened its central position. The big swing has been toward
expansive, cheap-land, single-story deon careful inference. Others are sheer velopment. But many persons in their
folklore or glib platitudes circulated enthusiasm tend to write off downtown
land as though it had become as obsoby professionally optimistic salesfolk.
lete as the buildings on it, without due
MANY STUDENTS of past booms have account of human factors like inertia,
commented on the propensity of con- monopolistic thinking, absentee. owntemporary opinion, unsoundly based, ership, speculative land pricing, and
to underestimate the emerging supply restrictive policies.
Others seem to have accepted too
of urbanized land and overestimate the•
demand for it. It is possible to trace uncritically part of the thesis of the late
And so, lacking information, the market relies on opinions, which always are
in long supply. Some of these are based

518

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

Harvard economist, Joseph A. Schum-

than in the central business district as

competition and running scared is still
no mean competitor itself. Decentralization has tended to deflate speculative
anticipations that buoy up downtown

of their cities and thus had ample
room to expand. The authors pub-

bargain relative to outlying sites whose

accounts for much more than half of the
postwar office space in the country. The
postwar increase alone exceeds the total

peter, and others, that capitalists re- a whole. Large parts of the districts
quire security from competition before were taken up with what they conthey will risk funds in large investirients sidered "noncentral business district"
uses, especially in the older eastern
like buildings.
But the sleeping giant downtown cities. Central business districts occuonce aroused by the sting of effective pied well under i percent of the areas
lished their work in Economic Geography, January 1955.

In the downtown of downtowns,
land prices and thus has made the
most expensive land in the world a Manhattan's accelerating office boom
asking prices have multiplied since
1950. Downtown can rebuild and

space in any other city in the United
finally has begun to do so.
When downtown rebuilds, it still has States. It is augmenting Manhattan's
the primary advantage of location that office space by 40 percent over 1946,
made it downtown in the first place— yet—far from exhausting the land supwhy run around end when you can ply of that tiny island—it is contained
step through center? And a few sky- in a mere 84 new buildings. And these

scraping hotels, office buildings, de- are focused on two narrow districts,
partment stores, and apartments—as the financial and commercial centers,
only downtown has the focused de- which are already most congested.
Homer Hoyt, an urban planning
mand to support—can do the work of
square miles of sprawl outside the city

consultant, in his monumental 100

limits. 3—D development can work Years of Land Values in Chicago, has
wonders with very little surface. In shown how the percentage of Chicago
Philadelphia, for example, just one land values contained in the Loop has

building, No. 3 Penn Center, in- risen and fallen many times in the

short span of Chicago's lifetime from
1833 to 1933. Decentralization has not
office space when it opened in 1955.
There has been a widespread idea been a continuing process. In the de'that downtown building space is satu- velopment of American cities, both
rated. Yet the editors of Architectural centralizing and decentralizing forces
Forum noted in March 1957 that the have worked. Now one dominates; toarchitect, Victor Gruen, retained to morrow it may be the other.
Opinion often seems to stray, too, in
replan downtown Fort Worth, found
that "the underused or derelict reser- interpreting the effect of a few skyscrapvoir was large enough to provide space ers and other intensive developments on
for a belt highway, parking garages future land values. Their advent confor 6o thousand cars, greenbelts, a 300 vinces many landholders that high
percent increase in ofiIce space, 8o per- land prices can be met.
But multistory buildings are substicent in hotel space, and new civic,
tutes—enormnously effective ones—for
cultural, and convention centers.
land. A few of them can pay high land
Fort Worth is not a special case. . .
The urban economic geographers, prices, but to do it they drain demand
R. E. Murphy, J. E. Vance, and B. J. from blocks around. To be sure, they
Epstein, discovered from a close study are also magnets pulling trade to the
of eight central business districts that city from miles away. But when cities
six of them were so decayed at the core all over the country are racing to the
that building heights in the zone of sky, outside competition tends to offset
peak land values averaged much less. this benefit.

creased by 4 percent the city's rental

F.

URBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

High buildings are symptoms of high
land prices. But to let a symptom be a

519
breadwinners' savings. Many analysts

translate this into increased effective
cause is to run a danger of circular demand. It may increase demand for
reasoning.

If land prices are prematurely high
to begin—higher than long-run supply-demand balance warrants—intensive vertical development must ultimately deflate the price balloon. The
longer this deflation is delayed, the

toys and TV, but no factor that increases the urgency of present over
future needs is likely to increase the
investment demand for a long-term,

deferred-income asset like title to land,
especially undeveloped land. Reduced
saving, higher interest rates, and lower
more the error compounds, and the land prices follow in logical sequence.
More schoolchildren also mean higher
more violent must be the reaction.
The same general lines of reasoning real-estate taxes, which tend to reduce
apply to horizontal urban expansion. the investment demand for land.
This is land substitution, too, destined
Then there are two sources of deultimately to cheapen urban land. Yet mand that almost by necessity are only

the psychological impact may be t temporary but that operators on the

create a feeling of central position that field of action may be unable to disleads to higher asking prices, more tinguish from more permanent sources
horizontal extension, and a rude of demand.
One is demand premised on anticipaawakening some day.
tions of rising land prices. High prices
ALONG WITH THOSE UNDERESTIMATES themselves, once realized, tend to deof supply there are overestimates of press demand, of coure, but expectademand.
tions of rising prices have the opposite
A prominent cause is exaggerated effect. They increase demand not only
reliance on population forecasts. These from avowed speculators but to some
have been notoriously unreliable in the extent from all land buyers, including
past. Techniques have improved, but builders and owner-occupants, who are
there is little warrant for the utter con- as glad as anyone to board the price
fidence with which forecasts are often elevator on the ground floor.
This demand is inherently very unrepeated. But this is not the main point.
stable.
On the way up, it helps fulfill
Population forecasts, if accurate, tell

us something about the volume of its own expectations, in the familiar
"need," but not so much about effective demand, which is another animal,
and the one whose power makes the
economic world go round.
Some half of the postwar building
boom has been to produce more space
per person—that is, greater spending
per capita has been as much a factor
as greater population. Undoubling of

pattern of speculative markets wherein
expectations of rising prices make prices

rise. Eventually, however, even if
higher prices fail to dampen expecta-

tions of further rises, they certainly
increase carrying costs and dampen the
basic demands of ultimate consumers.

Once prices stop rising, this unreliable element of demand is likely to
families, which was one element in this collapse. If it is a large share of the
trend, has now virtually halted—the total demand, its desertion will then
average number of persons per house- let prices sink. Stability is next to imhold has leveled off at about 3.3 since possible in such a market. Prices either
1954. The recent and immediately fore- continue up or turn down.
A second unstable element of decast Iwelling of population is in the
mand
is that generated by investment
relatively unproductive age groups under i8 and over 65. But neither babies in construction.
Construction is largely a migratory
nor aged dependents increase one's inindustry,
which creates temporary decome or borrowing power.
mands
on
local facilities in areas of
Supporting them does tend to reduce

520

growth. This poses no difficult forecasting question around fly-by-night
construction camps. But elsewhere it
is all too easy to confuse temporary
demand from construction spending
with demand from more permanent
sources. They are hard to distinguish

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1958

side money flowing in increases the
reserves of local banks and encourages
them to lend. Under our banking sys-

tem, they can expand their loans by
more than the increase of reserves.
This expansion would generally lead

to drains on reserves that would stop it

short. But it need not happen immediately, especially in a booming disA small confusion of this sort may trict, where much of the banking sys-

in a complex, interdependent, growing
urban economy.

be multiplied into a large error because
of the leverage effect of outside money
on the development of a region.

tern's new loans come back to it in new.
deposits. The expanding loans of local

banks meanwhile, serve like outside

Because growth areas are capital- money, as part of the economic "base."
The situation may be complicated

hungry as a rule, construction usually
is financed largely from outside. Outside money flowing into an area serves
as part of its economic "base"—that is,
it sets up demand for local services and

once more where outside money flows
in, not simply to finance construction

or buy land, but to speculate in the

extreme sense of the word—to buy and,

sell and buy again. It is well known..
that New York banks have large deBecause local services account for posits held to speculate in Wall Street.
roughly half of the incomes of most When a city or district catches th
cities, each dollar of income financed imagination of the more colorful part
from outside serves as "base" for of the investment community, fund
another dollar or so of income from pour into its banks for similar .pur
services sold locally. Then there are poses. Homer Vanderblue, then of
many market-oriented or camp-follow- Harvard University, found that bank
ing industries, which move to an area deposits tripled in i months of 1924
largely because consumers are there and 1925 in the Florida land boom,'
sustains it by offsetting the inevitable
cash outflows.

ahead of them. When we consider only to flow out rapidly with the crash.

The wisdom of investors, or at least
them, a dollar of outside money may
exert several dollars' leverage on local their conservatism, might seem proof
against this sort of folly. But investors
income, depending on the locale.
Because these local sellers also re- in boom times have been notoriously

quire buildings and urbanized land susceptible to fads and stampedes.
with utilities for working and living,
they set up demands for more construction, which means more outside
money—and so on. Such a sequence,
once started wrong, can send development veering off course like a sliced
golf ball. We have seen this happbn in
the midst of our postwar prosperity

• around the atomic boomtowns of Ports-

Homer Hoyt laid down as a general
rule: "In each successive land boom
there is a speculative exaggeration o

the trend of the period..; ."

.

And as long as outsiders are ready to

•.

finance it, there is nothing to stop a '• .
new district or town from prospering

while the residents, exporting; littl
but mortgages, deposit slips, and, land

and tak ,
mouth, Ohio, Paducah, Ky., and titles, simply build the place
.
Aiken, S. C. With full foreknowledge
that construction payrolls were temporary, these three communities contrived to overbuild anyway, and each

in each other's washings
Outside investors are not going to do this knowingly. Jacob Stockfisch .
economist at the University of Wiscon-

suffered its depression-in-a-teapot when
the crews left town.

foresee tolerably well the complex in-I

sin, maintains that individuals can

Expansion of local banking often teractions of their investments. with
adds to the possibility of error. Out- those of others and trim their sails so

.

JRBAN EXPANSION—WILL IT EVER STOP?

521

as to achieve an orderly integrated
Will speculators and holdouts want
economic development. But history to continue meeting the rising carrying
leaves little doubt that this ideal be- costs on just the present supply?
havior presupposes a foresight and
Will lenders continue to extend
exchange of information which fallible, credit on such hazardous collateral?
suspicious man seldom achieves.
We return to our third critical question: Can urban expansion be a stable
process?

With i billion dollars in nonfarm

residential and commercial mortgages
(in September 1957), could the credit
system stand a real-estate collapse?

Apattern of expansion that stimuNo one knows for certain. History
lates vast oversupplies of urbanized puts the burden of proof on the affirm-•
land to meet a demand that is partly ative. Cities have rarely expanded
collapsible obviously presents some other than in crashing waves, and
danger of instability. The United today one sees several portents remiStates Census of Governments, in its niscent of previous crests.
Advance Release No. 3 for 1957, reSome of these portents are:
ported the number of vacant lots of
The rapid, manyfold rise of land
record in the United States at nearly prices around growing cities since

r

i 3 million (not counting parking lots). 1950;
That is 21 percent of all city lots, and
the sharp rise of construction costs;
about 13 times the annual consump-. the wildfire spread of municipal
tion in new construction.
zoning and regulations very hostile to
The census figure does not purport mass-market building;
to be more than an aggregation of local
the decline of residential construcrecords, and some of the "lots" re- tion since early 1955, coupled with an
corded are no doubt that in name only. increase of land-substitutive construcOn the other hand, some actual lots tion in extensions of roads and utilities,
never find their way into local records. and multistory buildings;
And the figure is especially striking in
the disproportionate increase of
light of the universal observation that transportation costs arid utility rates

subdividing land for sale of lots to since 195o;
avowed speculators has been at a minithe disproportionate increase and
mum during the postwar building high level of residential and commerboom, with its emphasis on mass-pro-

cial debt. (Its average annual increase
duced suburban developments from has been 9.5 billion dollars from ig4—
which lots arc sold only underneath 1956, and its annual percentage
houses.

The larger part of the land hanging
over urban markets is acreage not yet
subdivided into lots, but with ready
access to farfiung urban transportation
and utility networks.

growth rate i 4.4 percent over the i 946

base. That compares to 2.2 billions,

and 9.4 percent, for the period

1920—1930. In September 1957, :it
reached 143 billions, 48 percent of
disposable personal income. That
A study of Greensboro, N. C., in compares to 37 billions, and 45 per.

1956 by George Esser, Jr., of the Institute of Government of the University
of North Carolina, found i thousand
persons scattered over a quasi-urbanized area big enough for all the needs
of 6oo thousand. We have no reason to
believe that that is anything but typical of American cities.
Will private and public developers
add indefinitely to so swollen an inventory?

cent, in 1929.);

the general deterioration in the

quality of credit, as noted by Geoffrey

Moore, of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, and others, and

as exemplified by the growth of second-

mortgage financing;
the high level of interest rates;
the almost universal confidence that
growing population and living stand-

ards are pressing on the land supply

YEARBOOK OF AGRICULTURE 1:958

522

and insure a continual rise of land
prices.

resources to building highways, utility
networks, and whole new complexes of

The result of these combined causes

urban amenities so as to provide and

sponse, private and public, which few
would be so bold as to forecast.

out—substitutes for something:.that is
already in long supply. Not only is this
pattern wasteful of time, steel, cement,
gasoline, and good farmland; it founds

will depend largely on human re- serve substitute urban. lands further
Past mistakes, if that is what they

are, have not trapped us in any

dilemma beyond the power of in- national prosperity on the film of a
formed, intelligent action to resolve.
It is heartening to see so much concern quickening today over problems
of urban expansion. There is hope that

land bubble.

American public can avert the disasters that beset the past.
But whatever the immediate outcome, the public and its representatives, including farm-dominated State

building is not falling prices, but the

ing of this chapter suggests that

usually been a slow process of attrition,

And so it would seem wise for policy-

makers to set about lowering asking
prices for urban land. But here they

today's more literate and prudent meet a dilemma. What stimulates
end result of the fall—low prices. Fall-

ing prices themselves tend to depress
building. Few there are who want to
invest their money on the foundation
legislatures, would probably serve of a sinking land market.
Policymakers are tempted to put off
• themselves well to attend closely to the
the
day of reckoning, to tolerate and,
compelling problems of harnessing
urban land. This resource holds eco- in fact, actively support high land
nomic forces of titanic power for wel- prices. But the irony of such policies is
fare or destruction. Harnessed, these that they stimulate development of
forces could serve the public commen- still more substitute urban lands, and
surately with their unrivaled market set the stage for more drastic ultimate
values. Untamed, unpredictable, and collapse.
There seems one obvious escape from
irresponsible, they could figure in a
this
dilemma. As it must be done, do it
national calamity.
Indeed, they have already done so quickly. Bring land prices down fast,.
in a measure. The disintegration of our and get it over with.
If this is a desirable policy, however,
cities could be described conservatively
history
offers little comfort that it will
as a national calamity of some proportions, whose mischievous consequen- be enacted without painful changes in
ces only wait to be recognized. To established attitudes. Squeezing the
forestall more of the same, the reason- water from speculative land prices has

policymakers might do well to take with public agencies often bending :
steps to lower the prices asked for their efforts toward delaying the inevitable as long as . possible, while
urban lands.

The thesis of this chapter is that building stagnated.

.

urban land prices are uneconornically

But whatever policies are desirable,
I believe there certainly is urgent need
for public-minded citizens to agree on

vastly overestimated future demands.
I think this uneconomical price level
imposes a correspondingly uneconomi-

boom shows many evidences of evolving along the same lines as its notorious;
predecessors, which have . confronted !

high—that the "scarcity" of urban
land is an artificial one, maintained
by the holdout of vastly underesti- what those are now, before an emermated supplies in anticipation of gency strikes. For the suburban land

cal growth pattern on expanding

us

with several of the most trying

cities. High land prices discourage crises in American history. -We can ill
building on vacant lands best situ- afford to meet one today as indeated for new development and divert

cisively and ineffectively as in the pastr
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OVFICE* ISSI

Reproduced, with peripission, by the

RVGJflPG1 SCUOOL

