                STUDY S-324

  LAND AS AN ELEMENT OF
     HOUSING COSTS:
         THE EFFECTS OF
 PUBLIC POLICIES AND PRACTICES
THE EFFECTS OF HOUSING DEMAND

                Two Papers by:
               Mason Gaffncy
              Richard F. Muth



                October 1968




                   IDA
    INSTITUTE FOR DEFENSE ANALYSES
      PROGRAM ANALYSIS DIVISION
400 Army-Navy Drive, Arlington, Virginia 22202
                   HUD H-931
                                      I
             POLICIES AND PRACTICES AFFECTING URBAN LAND COSTS
                        AS AN ELEMENT OF HOUSING COSTS

                              by Mason Gaffney

                                     A.
                                INTRODUCTION


    Land is a major cost element of urban housing. Site values of improved
    urban lots are about 20 percent of the total value of new single unit
    dwellings. However, this ratio varies significantly between neighbor—
    hoods and regional areas in the United States. For example, for the
    third quarter, 1967, FHA da for proposed one-family homes to be
    financed under Section 203, indicated that house lot prices per
    square foot varied from $1.72 in Orange County, California, to $.16
    in Bixningham, Alabama--with the national average at $.38 per square
    foot) Cost per unit of land is much higher in densely populated
    areas. For example, the acquisition cost of 110 acres for a 00—
    operative apartment project in a decaying area qf Queens, New York
    was $6.5 million, or $3-,.u per acre, or nearly $2' per square foot. 2
          The cost of any parcel of urban land is derived from two elanents.
    First, a private investment must be made to transfomn raw land into
t   something usable for urban purposes. This private investment is
    embodied in the form of streets, sewers, utility facilities, and
    other privately financed improvements necessary for modern, urban
    living. Second, much urban land derives a value, and hence a cost

         1. See Area Trends, Second Quarter 1967, RR:250-M, (Department
    of Housing and Urban Development, FHA, Division of Research and
    Statistics).
          2 • See "Rochdale Village," a brochure prepared by the United
    Housing Foundation (New York, Noveaber, 1967). In addition, over
    $1.4 million was spent by the developer for water lines and sewers.
    Overall cost of the project was $100 million, including $85 million
    f or buildings and other site improvements.

                                     1
to any user, from an advantageous site location and from public works.
                                                                                     interact in comp1i
In the economic literature treating the subject of land, the source
                                                                                     and Pricing proces
of this second element of land cost is often viewed as economic rent,
                                                                                     are further compli
or simpiy as land rent or the earnings of land per se. As such, it
                                                                                     Policy elements:
is conceptually distinct from the return on any private investment i
                                                                                 /   Property taxation,
land improvements which is necessary to make raw land useful.
                                                                                     an attempt to clar:
      We may illustrate these two elements of land earnings as follows:
Suppose it requires private initial investment of $2500 (to include
a pro rata share of streets, sewers, and so forth) to transform a
piece of raw land into a usable house lot. If the opportunity rate
of return on investment is 10 percent, the annual earnings of the
lot will be $250 (the public bears any costs of maintaining and
replacing the facilities). The $250 might also be viewed as the
rental price, or hire, of the land. As such it represents the value
of the flow of services provided by the land improvements.
     Assume next an identical parcel of land that is favorably
located.    It could be within walking distance of an efficient urban
transportation system, or provide   its owners an inspiring view, or
both. As a result of this favorable location, it may be worth $1,000
a year for a homeowner to live in that location, in contrast to a
"marginal" location. Here there is a differential flow of services,
which has a value to consumers, associated with the particular
location.  If the rate of return on investment is 10 percent, the
$1,000 annual value of the services due to the choice location of
the land parcel will be capitalized at the 10 percent rate. Its
capital value is $10,000. This capital value is in addition to the
$2,500 investment in improvements necessary to make the parcel usable.
The total capital value of the land, or its acquisition cost, is
$12,500    if we assume a 1C)peroent capitalization rate. The annual
cost of the land's services (including that which is derived from
its preferet±al location) is $1,250.

     Th        terininants of urban land value--i.e., investment necessary
to transform raw or agricultural land into usable urban land,
differertia1svlue, and a capitalization or valuation process--

                                    2



                                                                             I
interact in complicated ways through the operation of land market
and pricing process. The operation of urban land markets and pricing
are further complicated by their interaction with critical public
policy elements: zoning, the location of public works and facflities,
property taxation, and Federal income tax practices. What foflows is
an attempt to clarify some of these relationships.                   —




                                 3
                                   B.

               ELEMENTS OF LAND COSTS AND PROPERTY TAX


1•   ThE STABLE CASE:   ANNUAL PLOWS VERSUS PRESENT VALUES3

     Table 1 illustrates by means of a hypothetical example the
nature of land cost. It is assumed that Parcel ATT possesses p
particular locational advantage; whereas Parcel "B" enjoys a favorable
locational advantage as illustrated by the $1,000 annual site advantage.
Both parcels are assumed to have embedded $2,500 worth of investment
which renders them useful for urban housing. (The mechanics of how
this kind of investment occurs——which is also the process by which
the supply of urban land is increased--will be discussed later).
The rate of return on investment, and the capitalization rate by
which all future income streams is discounted, is assumed to equal
10 percent. It is further assumed that the land itself, including
the investment embedded in it, is nondepreciable--i.e., the returns
and benefits flow indefinitely.
     Under these assumptions, Table 1 illustrates that the annual
cost and present worth methods of looking at land values are different
ways of viewing the same phenomenon. It should be emphasized, how-
ever, that in the case of urban land—because the supply can only be
increased in roundabout ways and because urban land is nondepreciable-—
some special forces operate that warrant clarification. These forces
operate through a capitalization process.




     1. For a more rigorous development of the material in this
section, in terms of the mathematics of investment, see Appendix A.
                                  5
                                     Table 1
                     ILLUSTRATION OF URBAN LAND VALUE
                               DETERNB'ATION


                                               Parcel A   Parcel B
        Investment Cost                        $ 2,500    $2,500
            Annual Return on Investment
            @ 10%                                 250        250

            Annual Differential Site
            Advantage                              0       1,000
            Annual Benefits (Cost)                250      1,250

        Present Cost (Worth)

            Discounted @ 10%                    2,500     12,500

        If we assume the stock of urban land is f:ixed, the primary focus
on the cost of the annual flows should be $250 and $1,250 for
Parcels A and B respectively. The cost is unchangeable. For
example, a lowering of interest rates which will reduce the capitali-
zation rate to, say, five percent, will not benefit the prospective
homeowner. The fixed earnings of the land will be capitalized by
the lower five percent rate; parcel A's price will increase to $5,000
and parcel B's to $25,000. The purchaser of parcel B, therefore,
will have to borrow $25,000 at 5 percent, instead of $12,500 at 10
percent. The lowering of interest rates, per se, does ixt     benefit
the housing consumer insofar as he consumes the services of urban
land.
     Let us next assume that parcel B is subjected to special property
taxes, say $500 a year (possibly because it is in a "high tax" juris-
diction). The net private rent (or benefits derived from the land
site) fall to $750 ($1,250 annual benefits, less $500 annual tax).
The $750 annual rent after tax is capitalized at a rate of 10 percent
and the market price of the land is $7,500. The prospective purchaser
of the land confronts a market price for the parcel of $7,500, plus a

                                       6
present worth of future tax obligations of $5,000. The cost of the
land remains the same. Conversely, if the property tax is reduced,
only the land owner benefits. The market price of the land increases
to reflect the reduced property tax obligation. The essential ele-
ments of land cost remain. Students who propose property tax reduction
as a means of permitting lower cost housing should riot be surprised
if in fact no cost reduction occurs. Rather, under certain ccxiditions
such property tax reduction may only increase the net worth of land
owners.
     To summarize, there are certain inescapable costs associated
with urban land. Land parcels that enjoy a preferential location,
and hence an tteconcIc rent," incur a cost that cannot be avoided.
Lower interest (or capitalization) rates, more or less differential
property taxation, merely operate to change the prices which are
registered in the market for the land itself.
     By recognizing these points, we can dispose of some specious
but ineffective proposals for lowering land cost:
    (1) Lower interest rates: These raise the land price base
    in the same proportion that they lower the capitalization
    rate, leaving yearly carrying costs constant.
          This argument presupposes a supply of land that is not
    elastic (or responsive) to lower interest rates. It would
    have to be modified under assumptions which made land supply
    rise with a fall of interest rates. For example, subsidized
    low cost credit for housing helps housing take land from
    industry, trade, recreation, charitable institutions, and
    agriculture. The supply of land for any one activity has
    some elasticity, especially if that activity is subsidized
    at the expense of others. The critical point is that there
    is no magic in low interest rates as a general policy that
    will circumvent holding costs.
    (2) Lower tax rates: The basic general analysis is exactly
    the same as for interest rates. Lower tax rates can raise
    land prices. The net result is to substitute an added interest
    cost for the reduced tax cost.
         Due to the nature of credit markets, the tradeoff between
    interest and taxes is not perfect and has an allocative effect.
    It removes a cost (property taxes) that bears equally on all
    landowners and replaces it with one (interest) that varies
    inversely with the credit rating of the individual. Credit
    ratings vary directly with income and wealth. Lower property
    taxes, therefore, can operate unfavorably against the low
    income groups seeking to acquire homes.
                                 7
     (3) Higher land taxation: It is often asserted that higher
     land taxes will reduce the cost of land. Although it is
                                                                      "7
     correct that through a capitalization process, higher property
     taxes will reduce the market price of land, the prospective
     buyer should also include the present worth of future tax
     obligations as part of the acquisition cost of land. However,
     there is a case for higher land taxes, as indicated in (2) by
     the criticism of the effects of lower land taxes. Raising
     the land tax substitutes an impartial tax cost f or an interest
     charge that bears more heavily on lower-income groups. Land
     taxation lowers thus the capital that must be raised by private
     parties to achieve land ownership. If low-income individuals
     encounter higher costs of raising capital than do high-income
     individuals (and groups, including corporations), property
     taxes which lower land acquisition costs will operate to the
     relative advantage of those in the lower income groups. In
     addition, the added tax revenue from higher land taxation can
     assist local governmentsto  handle their financial problems,
     or substitute for such taxes as payroll taxes (i.e., city
     "income" taxes), sales taxes, and perhaps taxes on building
     improvements. As noted earlier, however, an increase of land
     tax rates implies a wealth loss to those owning the land at
     the time the rate increase is anticipated. This loss occurs
     to all land owners——including lower income individuals who own
     their homes.

2.   LAND COST AND ThE SUPPLY OF LAND

a.   Some General Relationships
     A large share of what we normally call land value is not pro-
duced by private people in the same sense that buildings are, and
land rent is not a reward for producing land. It may be described
as a "public value," the joint product of appropriation and tenure
protection provided through the police power of government, and
access and utility provided by public works • The worth of land
also arises from spillover benefits of private wor1s on neighboring
land. These spilover benefits values are "public" too, in the
sense of not being captured by their producers, but by the neighbors
of the producers.
     For these reasons we can speak of land cost as not serving very
directly to elicit the stock of land, and to treat stock as inelastic
to price. This is not to say the stock is fixed in a meaningful
economic sense. Area is fixed, but the productive and want-satisfying
                                  8
potential of the fixed area is indefinitely expansible as spillover
benefits from social progress and public works accumulate • But this
process occurs mostly without the work of the landowner as such
there is no direct market mechanism whereby the public value of land
stimulates its own production.
     High land costs do motivate landowners to intensify the use of
their land, where zoning allows it. This is a vital economic function
of land price, without which the limited stock of valuable land
would be used wastefully. The good use of a fixed stock has many
effects that resemble an increase of supply, and the two are often
confused. A 20-story building on a site uses less land per unit of
builthng.   When fill is dumped into the bay, use is made of a marginal
underwater site. Higher land costs also takes land from lavish
users-—sportsmen, gentleman farmers, nurseries, and so forth--and
causes it to be used for the needs of those who are willing to pay a
higher price for less land per capita. In the process, a new set of
prices is established, which is a necessary condition to attain the
new and more intensive use of land.
     But there is only a weak and indirect stimulus from land price
to motivate people to "produce" land for housing. High land prices
might motivate local governments to extend public works. But it is
the public equity in the land, as asserted through taxation, that is
the direct motive. A higher private equity motivates public works
insofar as it moves landowners to exert political pressure to promote
public works.
     With these relationships in mind, let us review the effects of
lower interest (1) and tax rates (t). No longer are they parallel,
but at odds, for the public and private equities are divided in the
proportions of t and i. (Compare Eq. A14 in Appendix A, "The
Mathematics of Land Costs.") The public share of rent is Pet, and
the private share is P•i. If i fails, the public share of rent
()    rises • This should motivate cities to extend public works.
Thus it may, through the tortuous path of city councils, add to land
supply.

                                  9
     A higher tax rate should motivate cities to add to land stock
by extending public works because a higher tax rate means a higher
public equity in land. Thus higher land taxes should not reduce land
supply; rather, they actually can cause it to be increased.4
b.   Some Administrative Practices

     The points that land taxation can operate to increase the supply
of urban land, and to lubricate the functioning of the market mech-
anism, depend on the assumption that the tax system is administered
in a certain way: that the tax base is an assessed value estimating
the "opportunity cost" or best alternative use of land, and assessment
is uniform. In practice this assumption is seldom perfectly met,
and often not even approached. Let us now review the aspects of
assessment and other practices most inimical to releasing land for
low—cost housing.

     (1) Exemptions. A large share of real property is exempt from
the property tax. The privilege does not attach to the property,
in rem, but to the organization - church, school, charity, foundation,
brotherhood, cemetery association, state and Federal government, etc.
It is therefore indefinitely expansible as these privileged groups
accumulate more assets. Today, nore and more human activity is
being channeled into tax— exempt institutions.
          The privilege being granted by the state, the local govern-
ment has only weak defenses against erosion of its real estate tax
base. The result is to limit the use of the property tax because
the privilege is naturally rth sost where tax rates are highest.
Any municipality that taxes its property to provide superior local

     4 • There is also some deliberate private production of land
value to consider. Large private landowners can consciously plan to
deliberately create spillovers--" internalize externalities"-—as in
shopping centers, or other large, integrated land developments. If
this were the predominant source of land values, indeed, the
conclusion of the preceding paragraph would have to be reversed.
On the whole, lowever, it is secondary to public works financed by
government.

                                 10
services will be that much more attractive to tax-exempt institutions.
Thus the very existence of the threat of invasion by exempt institu-
tions serves to limit the positive good that might be done by raising
tax rates on land.
         The primary direct damage done to low-income housing by tax
exemption, of course, is the withholding of land from home seekers.
The exempt holder has lower carrying costs, and can outbid the taxa-
ble rival for at least some land. In addition, exempt parcels in
other uses, or unrelated uses, break up neighborhood symbiosis and
synergism.   In a perfect market, the highest use of a site is generally
that which maximizes the present value of the net income stream.
Such a use would be most complementary to the use of neighboring
sites.   This is most obvious in commercial centers. Churches,
cemeteries, or schools at key places--which would t be located in
a given site if they had to pay property taxes—-break up the integrity
of retail centers, reducing their agg-regate power to satisfy wants,
and sending retailers out in search of other sites. In this search
they compete with homesite seekers over wide areas.
      (2) Underassessment of Land. Although in some cases it does
not matter how the total assessment is divided between land and
building, in other cases to be discussed below, it does.
           (a) Land under old buildings--When a builder buys an old
"junker" and demolishes it, he obviously has bought land. The "land
value" is the purchase price plus demolition cost. On the eve of
demolition, therefore, old buildings should be assessed at zero or
less (salvage less demolition costs); and the land be assessed
at the full value of the parcel, or more. However, a study of about
1500 demolitions in Milwaukee over the last six years has brought
out that just before demolition the assessor attributed over half
the assessed value to the building. This suggests that the assess-
ment practice may be generally biased in favor of land. This practice,
which probably prevails nationwide, has a number of effects inimical
to the production of buildings.

                                  11
                First, it lets new buyers of "junkers" redepreciate
much of the purchase price for income tax shelter, so long as they
do not renew. The Internal Revenue Service accepts local assessorTs
allocations of value between depreciable building and nondepreciable
land.
                Second, it puts a bias in favor of larger and more
valuable grounds around buildings. If a parcel with a larger lot is
assessed higher on account of the lot, it is not assessed enough
higher when the proportion of the land to building is understated.
Gasoline stations with wide aprons, for example, would receive lower
assessments.
                Third, to the extent that the assessment on neighboring
vacant parcels is set and defended by comparison with nearby land, it
biases downward and appears to justify low assessments on parking
lots, unused land, vast grounds, etc.
                Fourth, it makes an artificial incentive for owners to
demolish old buildings of some residual value--often supplying low
income housing——and leave land vacant, to lower their tax assessment.
                Fifth, it partially converts the land tax into a tax
on new buildings. Landowners may or may not succeed by demolition
and waiting in keeping the land assessment down when they renew the
site. Local practice varies widely.     In New York, it is comiwn for
the land assessment to be raised when a new building goes up on the
site. That practice makes the "land" tax partly5 a tax on new


     5. It is still partly a land tax because on land of low value
the land assessment could not rise much or at all when a new building
is erected.    In
                general, so long as the rise of land assessment bears
some relation to the land value, and is not simply a fixed proportion
of the building cost, it is partly a land tax. Indeed, it is con-
ceivable that the increase of land assessment could be entirely a
function of the land's market value and independent of the building
value. Then it would act as a building tax in respect to       of
renewal, but as a land tax in respect to intensity and quality  of the
building. A land tax assessment administered this way would probably
increase rather than reduce intensity when renewal occurred; the
builder would want to minimize the amount of land whose assessment
rose when he renewed the site. The net result would be sites renewed

                                  12
buildings, and provides an incentive to defer renewal. In some
jurisdictions, sale of land is the occasion for reassessment, making
the "land" tax really a tax on change of ownership, locking in old
owners and penalizing new ones——usually builders.
               It might seem healthier for builders, by comparison, if
land assessments simply remained frozen on the occasions of building
or sale; and there are cases of that, too. But that means gradual
tax exemption for land altogether, putting the whole burden on build-
ings, requiring a higher tax rate, reinforcing the disincentive
effects of taxing buildings.
               The proper standard against which to compare present
practice is one in which land assessments are based on value, as the
law directs. Value at any time is what the land if bare would sell
for. It is value in the best alternative use: the economists'
"opportunity cost." It is independent of present use or ownership.
It changes year by year, usually gradually, as demands and neighbor-
hoods change. A proper land assessment changes in step with these
exogenous determinants, ignoring the specific response that individual
landowners make to their environmental challenge. A simple test of
land assessment technique is whether the assessor uses a map of land
values that may be contoured, showing the dependence of land value
on location. Most assessors, astoundingly, have no such map. Their
assessed land values jump up and down from lot to lot.
               The rarity of proper land assessment practice is
attested to by the conmution aroused when an assessor applies it.
Currently Assessors Francis Austin in Rosslyn, Virginia; Theodore
Gwartney in Southfield, Michigan; and Irene Hickman in Sacramento,
California are following the practice, apparently with positive
results.

"too much, too late." As we now observe durably constructed high-
rise buildings rising in many downtown areas long overdue for renewal,
it is worth hypothesizing that this pattern of land assessment practice
plays a role in determining land use.


                                 13




 I                  FI                 I        I        I
               (b) Appreciating Land. The Census of Governments in 1957
     and periodically thereafter has supplied the most thoroughgoing
     nationwide evidence on assessment discrimination. Underassessment
     of vacant land was unquestionably the most extreme and consistent
     discrimination. Many fragmentary earlier studies had shown the same
     pattern, although obviously there have been periods (Like the 1930's
     when vacant land was being abandoned for taxes) when this pattern did
     not prevail.
                    The pattern develops from several causes, other than
     explicit intent. One is that assessors tend to confuse the
     property tax with the in personam income tax, and base assessments
     on present land use, income, and ownership, regardless of land
     potential. Thus land used for fanning is regarded as "farm land,"
     a class bearing lower assessments, regardless of urban value. Some-
     times they confuse it with the welfare system and hold down assess-
     ments for "widows and orphans," although here one must register
     skepticism atout who is hiding behind the widow's skirts. Sometimes
     they wait for a "happening," like a sale, raising the assessment
     on the parcel sold but not on the neightoring parcels.
                    Often assessors wait for subdivision. Subdivision
     raises square foot values and differentiates parts of a tract, so
     it is an occasion for reassessment; but assessors make it the
     occasion to tax nDt merely the gain from subdividing, but all the
     prior incrnent in acreage value as well. The effect must certainly
     be to defer subdivision. Another probable effect is to raise density
     in subdivisions in order to minimize the area of land whose assessment
     rises. The last may be a saving grace for low-income buyers but if
     it allocates capital inefficiently it is rot for long a favor to
     low-income buyers most vulnerable to a shortage of capital.
                    Another way to avoid subdivision and still profit from
     urban demand is to sell off acreage having frootage on a road someone
     else has paid for. The inefficient land-use pattern is commonplace
     in urban fringes: individual driveways attached like
     suckers to a tree trunk; interior acreage idle, or farmed. As this

                                      14
t.
can occur without formal subdivision it costs the landowner less.
If he avoids a tax increase as well, he is doubly motivated to subur-
banize his land in this way, losing half of its potential to satisfy
human wants.

          Cc) Missized lots-- Assessors often regard the unit of
assessment to be the lot, or ownership unit,   with its existing
boundaries, rather than the square foot. Thus they can put a lower
square foot value on a large   lot than a neighboring small lot,
without seeming to depart from market value as the criterion. They
do not assess unrealized tTplottage"——the gain from optimizing size of
parcel.
               Thus lots larger than the optimum are not assessed
more in proportion to their land content. In newly dividing land,
this puts a bias toward larger lots.
               In older areas, where apartments are succeeding single
family dwellings, the plottage problem is rather the reverse: lots
below optimal size are assessed lower because they are too small.
This strengthens the hand of holdouts, helps to make land assembly
f or apartments more costly than it should be, and contributes to a
pattern of "apartment sprinkle" in the inner city that, in terms of
apartment intensities, is more extreme than "urban sprawl" at the
urban fringe. It not only slows apartment building but also casts
its own floating value pattern over interstitial land, pricing it
too high for new low income housing other than apartments.
          (d)   Zoning devices-- When assessors finally do catch up
with rising market values of appreciating land, owners seeking to
minimize their carrying costs have another bowstring in low-density
zoning. Low-density zoning, if credible, holds down actual market
values and so justifies low assessments and carrying costs. Even if
it carries low credibility in the market, it may still get by in
court and justify low assessments. The holder has the best of both
worlds where low-density zoning is coupled with a lax policy of
granting zxning variances and spot zoning to individuals at the time
they are ready to cash in.
                                   15
                   Low-density zoning has become almost universal in
    suburbs. The practice operates to keep low-income homeseekers Out
    of a municipality because they have school age children and are
    therefore feared to be net fiscal liabilities. The only effective
    cowiterforce will be state school aid based on population or atten-
    dance. But some suburbs even zone so low and strictly that they
    virtually destroy the resale value of land. This succeeds in holding
    down assessments and school costs, but would seem to be biting the
    nose to spite the face. However, there are tax motives here, too.
                      First, the loss of revenue may be largely to an
    outside body, the county    or a large school district, rather than to
    the municipality that imposes the zoning. In Wisconsin, with its
    shared state income tax obviating property tax revenues for rich
    municipalities, this is a common motive. The zoning is essentially
    a species of fraud against the countywide equalization process,
    sparing the suburbsT having to contribute much in county property
    taxes, during the years while they await their capital gains that
•

    can result from generally increasing land values. These they will
    reap at some future date, as yet undisclosed, when they will      change
    their zoning and allow subdivision. Another force behind low-density
    zoning    is the open—space conservation movement. On the whole
    advocates of open space may be relied on to oppose cities, subdivisions,
    and land taxes, on whatever gtound the issue may   be joined  ata given
    time.    Although not explicitly committed to perpetuating ghettoes
    and slums, open—space advocacy inspires low-density zoning and is a
    powerful force to reckon with.
            (3)   Delinquency With Option to Redeem. Most state laws grant
    landowners extended rights to reclaim land after letting taxes go
    delinquent for some years. In the late twenties and early thirties
    it was common for speculators to hold land tax delinquent, on the
    chance that it might appreciate. Should it do so, they could pay
    their back taxes with light penalties. Should it not do so they let
    it go for back taxes: heads they win, tails the county loses. In
    the meantime the land was frozen, unavailable to builders; and those
    who improved their own land had to pay taxes for them.
                                         16
     (4) Fighting Annexation by the City. Some landowners can
 successfully resist annexation by the city. Often quite near the
city center there are wild lands that the city cannot saddle with
 services and taxes. In the absence of county zoning, wealthy resi-
dent landowners generally use extra space f or insulation against
nuisances that their neighbors might inflict: midget auto racing
tracks, dumps, and so forth. Commitment of capital to individual
wells and septic tanks, low capacity roads, and so forth during the
early succession period strengthens resistance to incorporation and
full urbanization, often leaving such lands for decades at much lower
densities than
          More cdmon is preemptive incorporation. Landowners in
the path of urban growth established a "cityt' dedicated to being rural,
or much less dense than the adjacent and sometimes surrounding city.
Here a group of landowners manage to maintain a low density of land
use. Snob zoning is used, but more is involved than zoning. Street
and utility networks are kept primitive, so that tax rates may be
low-—the "septic tank suburbs." These practices hold down the unit
value of land for resale, a disadvantage to owners wanting quick
cash, but an advantage to owners seeking deferred capital gains and
minimum carrying costs for tax purposes.
C.   Summary

     The principle mechanism by which higher prices of urban land
operate to increase the supply of land is through the local govero-
ment, which provides the social investment necessary to convert raw
or agricultural land into land usable for urban purposes. Through a
wefl administered property tax system, the local government can
also have a powerful financial incentive to increase urban land
supply. The sine       non for a well administered property tax system,
however, is to appraise land for tax assessment purposes in such a
way as to reflect the economic or opportunity cost of the land.
There is a widespread tendency to undervalue land for property tax
purposes, which simultaneously is contrary to the stated intent of
legislators when they write the tax laws. These assessment practices,
                                   17
         combined with low-intensity zoning, operate to reduce the supply of
         land available for urban use, including housing. The lower supply
         increases the market price of the land that is available.
              An important policy implication of these points is that local
         governments may have at their immediate disposal untapped resources
         to cope with their financial difficulties. The property tax, poten-
         tially, is a means of financing public works improvements which can
         enhance the local setting and thereby increase land values. Conversely,
         public works financed by high government units (e.g., state and Fed-
         eral) can often operate mainly to enhance local land values in such
         a way as to benefit only the land owners. This possibility suggests
         that grants from the state and Federal governments to local govern-
         ments should primarily be employed to provide support for services
         oriented toward people, to include educational programs. However,
         any program of grants to local governments must be very carefully
         designed and administered if they are to achieve the effects pux'-
    :1
         ported for them, rather than being a mere transferra.]. of ederal
         taxing power to state and local governments. Such actions, in turn,
         contain a high probability of extensive Federal "interventionism"
         in local government affairs, which creates a further set of problems.
         3.   PROPERTY XES: ThR GENERAL SEITThG
              The previous sections treating land costs and their relationship
         to property taxes should be placed in a proper general setting.
         Actually, property taxes are also imposed on all "real estate,"
         including buildings and housing, and on "personal" property.
         "Personal" property includes industrial equipment, machinery and
         inventory, as well as agricultural and commercial inventory. Public
         utilities, including railroads, telephone, and other service utilities,
         also bear substantial property tax burdens.
              Table 2 shows the extent to which the US property tax system
         taxes assets other than housing, as well as housing.
p




                                          18
                                  Table 2
                     EFFECTIVE PROPERTY TAX RATES,
                     BY MAJOR TYPES OF ASSETS, 1956a

                                                                  Effective
                                                   Property Tax  Property
                                   Asset Value,0     Payments    Tax Rate
     Type of Jsset                   (Millions)      (Millions)C (Percent)
     Non—Farm Housing               $406,780          $5,195        1.28
     Agriculture                     149,117           1,164         .78
     Total Non-Farm Business          503,286          5,544        1.10
     Selected Utilites and
     Transport                       118,158           1,541        1.30
     Manufacturing                   161,814           1,620        1.00
     Other                           189,314           2,383        1.07


     a. Source: Dick Netzer, Economics of the Property Tax,
         (Washington, D. C. 1966) pp. 20, 28—29.
     b. Asset value data primarily from Goldsmith; The National
         Wealth of the United States (Princeton: Princeton Univ.
         Press, 1962).
     c.   Property tax data from the Census of Governments, which
          encompasses fiscal years exxiing in 1956—57.

     When viewed in this broader context, it is apparent that the
property tax operates as a general tax on the earnings or income from
wealth, including land. As such, it can cause the private earnings
from all investment activity to fall and it lowers the rate at which
all asset. earnings are capitalized. For example, if the before tax
rate of return on new investment is 10 percent, a property tax system
which taxes 17 percent of thtal net asset earnings will lower the
capitalization rate to 8.3 percent. In 1966, property taxes amounted
to 17 percent of total asset earnings in the United States. Table 3           t
shows the derivation of these estimates.
     Table 3 also illustrates that property taxes have increased in
both their absolute and relative impact on property earnings. A
recognition of this general character of the US property tax system
has two important implications.
                                    19
                               Table 3
            DERIVATION OF ASSET EPRNINGS, 1956 and l9G6
                         (Millions of Dollars)

                                             1956          1966
    Net National Product                    384,768       697,782
       Employee Compensation                242,502       435,719
       Property Earnings
         Corporate Profits                   41,990        82,196
         Rental Income                       10,913        19,374
         Net Interest                        11,716        20,163
         Property Taxe&                      12,147        25,392
       Total Property Earnings               76,766       147,125
       Total Earningsc                      319,268       582,844
       Property Earnings as
       Percent of Total                          24.0        25.2
       Property Taxes as Percent
       of Property Earnings                      15.8        17.3

    a. Source: Survey of Current Business, July, 1961, 1963
        and 1967.
    b. Comprises property and vehicle license taxes identified
        as "business" taxes, and classified as an element of
        "indirect" business taxes in the national accounting
        scheme. Does not include an element of property taxes
        (specifically personal property taxes and vehicle license
        taxes) imposed on individuals which in the national
        accounting framework are classified as "personal" taxes.
        In 1966, these taxes were $1,956 million.
    c. Remainder of net national product claimed by non-farm
        and farm proprietors (which the national accounts do not
        identify in terms of labor and non-labor earnings), and
        the non-property tax elements of "indirect taxes"--speci-
        fically sales and excise taxes.

    First, to produce the effects on land values discussed in
Section B of this Study-—whereby a land tax is "capitalized" and the
market price of land falls-—land yielding an economic or differential
"rent" must. be taxed at a higher rate than other assets are taxed.
If land earnings are reduced by only the same proportion as are the
                                   20
earnings of other assets, the capitalization rate and the land
earnings fall by equal proportions. Lower earnings are discounted
by a proportionally lower rate, and land values remain unchanged.
     On the other hand, to the extent that land is not as heavily
taxed as are other assets, Like improvements and industrial assets,
possibly as a result of assessment practices   discussed above, land
values will be higher than they would otherwise be. Land thus becomes
an attractive asset to hold; and improvements on it may be discouraged
insofar as they call the assessor's attention to reappraise it.
Property tax administration appears to be a critical factor in urban
land cost and use.
      The general nature of property taxes causes many students to
ignore a second important point when they focus on the subject of
housing. Some students suggest that the property tax is an important
cause of high housing costs in urban areas.6 The policy implication
is that property taxes should be reduced. For example, a property         4

worth $20,000 in an urban area might bear an annual property tax of
$400 to $600 which would be an effective tax rate of 2 to 3 percent.
Thus property taxes, along with martgage interest, appear to be a
major iten in the annual, or "full cost" of housing services. The
property tax is thus viewed as a "consumption" tax. It is also
tempting to translate property tax liabilities into estimates of the
"burden"   they place on housing owners and occupants (as consumers) as
a percentage of their income.7 Thus it is held that property taxes
especially burden the poor since they allegedly spend a larger share
of their income on housing than do middle and upper income families.
     This line of thinldng warrants careful examination. First, it
does not fully take into account the fact that property taxes are
"general" insofar as they are imposed on property other than housing.

     6.    See e.g. Dick Netzer, Impact on the Property Tax: Effect
on Housing,. Urban Land Use, Local Government Finances (printed for
the use of the Joint Economic Committee) Washington, GPO, 1968.
     7. Ibid, p. 19.

                                   21
    Consequently, the property tax may be considered to be a tax on
    wealth generally. Viewed in this way, the property tax simply re-
    duces the earnings of the wealth and of property owners generally--
    including landlords (rich and poor) as well as low income individuals
    who own their homes.
          A recognition of the general impact of this tax does not deny
    that if the tax were eliminated from housing but kept on other assets,
    an increased flow of investment into housing would be encouraged.
    However, a recognition of this possibility only means that tax
    exemption of some selected activities, when all other activities
    are taxed, is a subsidy and can indeed increase the output and reduce
    the price of the subsidized commodity. It would be equally appro-
    priate to recommend that businesses and workers engaged in housing
    construction be exempted from income taxes • Such exemption, by
    making housing activity attractive relative to other activities would
    stimulate the flow of workers and capital into the housing sector.
         Second, to the extent that tax assessors in urban areas may in
    fact be imposing heavy taxes on land values, and to the extent that
    those heavier taxes are reflected in lower land values, the effective
    tax rate, i.e., the ratio of tax to the market value of the property,
    will be high. Empirical evidence of high effective property tax
    rates in urban areas (particularly central cities) may in fact
    reflect heavy taxation of the favorable location of the property.
    If such tax capitalization has occurred, lowering of property taxes
    may only operate to enhance the earnings of the land owners, and to
    increase land values. No reduction in housing costs will occur.8
         In summary, property taxes should not be viewed as "consumption"
    taxes-—on housing or anything else. Rather, they reduce the earnings
    from creating and holding assets (which is the main reason property

         8 • Prof. Netzer's cited works (especially his Economics of the
    Property Tax Washington: Brookirgs, 1966 ) take this effect into
    account in his excellent treatment of site value taxation. However
    we believe that he has not yet fully incorporated that analysis into
    his general statements about forward shifting of the property tax.
    Nor has he given due weight to the fact that even taxes on buildings
    may be borne by landowners in the form of reduced land values.
                                    22


I
owners complain about them).    Given an overall level of asset taxation,
higher taxation of land earnings due to favorable location can reduce
the market price of land and capture for the local goverrmtent a share
of the land rent. Under-taxation of land, on the other hand, benefits
only the landowner and causes the market price of land to be higher.
Tax relief for housing in densely populated urban areas may or may
not benefit consumers of housing. To the extent that it does not, it
makes landowners more wealthy; to the extent such tax relief does
benefit housing consumers, it does so only insofar as the property
tax system is simultaneously taxing other kinds of assets more heavily,
and in this fashion is forcing capital investment out of nonhousing
activities and into housing. In this case the property tax system
is operating to subsidize one forn of consumption at the expense of
others • In most cases, property tax relief f or housing in urban
areas will probably exert effects both favorable to landowners and
to subsidized housing consumers.




                                   23
                                                     C.

                         THE FEDERAL INCOME TAX AND LAND VALUE


The Federal income tax system is characterized by major differences
in the rates at which different kinds of earnings or gains are
taxed: personal income at a scheduled rate of 14 to 70 percent,
corporate profits at 48 percent, and realized long-term capital
gains at one-half the personal or corporate rate or a maximum
of  25 percent or at a minimum of zero percent. Important items like
depreciation (particularly accelerated forms of depreciation),
interest on borrowed money, and charitable giving are deductable for
purposes of computing taxable income. These and other features of
the Federal tax system combine in ways to make land an especially
attractive vehicle by which taxpayers can reduce their income tax
liabilities, and in this fashion increase land prices and hold land
of f the market.

1.       COVERT WRJTBDFP OF UNDEPRThTED AND APPRECIATED LAND VALUE

       Urban land is nondepreciable for tax purposes, on the ground
that it is physically indestructable. If a nondepreciating asset
could be written off, its income would achieve complete tax exemption
as foflows: Let t be the income tax rate. When the taxpayer writes
off the asset, he reduces his tax liability by that amount, and his
tax payments by t percent of that amount. Now the Treasury has put
up t percent of the value of the asset. It also receives t percent
of the income of the asset. Thus the Treasury simply receives a
return on its investment. As for the owner, he has now invested
only (1-t) percent of the value; and he gets (l.-t) percent of the
income. On his equity9 he would earn a tax—free income in perpetuity.

       9. We assume 100 percent equity financing, f or expository simpli—
city. Actually the game is leverage, or using borrowed funds to finance
the venture. The mortgaged landowner who writes off land could easily
end up receiving income on no equity at all.
                                                    25
     The way to write off land is to buy it under an old building
and allocate most of the acquisition cost of the property to the
building, which is depreciable. If the remaining life of the building
is short, it is rapidly depreciable (although there are limits to
what one can get away with). The IRS has no well organized defense
against this practice. It permits taxpayers to use the land-building
allocation reported by the local tax assessors as evidence supporting
their allocation. These allocations consistently understate the land
component by a very large factor.
    Covert writeoff of land is a factor above and beyond the multiple
writeoff of buildings. This latter is a more or less intended con-
sequence of accelerated building depreciation, which reduces book
value of the depreciable asset below its remaining resale value.
Land depreciation occurs when the buyer of an old building allocates
less value to the land than it had originally, eventhough it has
not declined; or allocates the same, even though it has risen.
     There might seem to be recapture of land writeoff when one sells
and pays a tax on the excess of sale price over book value. But this
tax is twice diluted. First, it is deferred until sale, whereas
writeoff came earlier. Second, it is at capital gains rates; the
writeoff was from ordinary income. If the owner never sells there is
never an occasion to recapture.
    But actually taxpayers can do even better than that by selling,
because the buyer starts writing off the land all over again--no
matter how many times it was done before. Thus land, which the law
says is not supposed to be depreciated at all, is written off several
times. The only proviso is that it must remain under an old building.
      Were it not for this device, the income tax might prosote urban
renewal. Once the initial cost of a building was ccanpletely written
off, accelerated or not, its current cash flow would be fully taxable.1°

     10.   Indeed, if a building underwent locational obsolescence due
to land appreciatian, writeoff should end before the life originally
contemplated, as soon as the "challenger" land value equalled the
"defender" value of land with old building.

                                  26
Thus in the year after the last allowable writeoff, the slum owner
would suddenly face a much higher tax bill. If he wanted a tax
shelter in real estate, he could get it only by actually building; not
by redepreciating old slums.
     But under present practice the surest way to lose the privilege
of depreciating land is to clear it and erect a new building. For
then the IRS perceives that what was bought was not the depreciable
building but the nondepreciable site underneath it. It denies
writeoff. Even demolition cost is nondepreciable. Or, if there was
no recent purchase, the IRS allows depreciation only on the cost of a
new building construction, not the land. The net effect: an owner
can depreciate land so long as he does not improve it.
     Thus the tax law biases owners of older buildings to delay
renewal, to milk the last drop of tax shelter out of old buildings
before releasing the land for new.

2. EXPTIONS
a.   Exemption of Imputed Income
     Durable goods used for the owner's consumption yield an income
"in kind" that is not taxed. The price of land is more affected by
this than is that of other assets because the service flow from land
is 100 percent income—-no wearing out.
     The availability of land that builders might use is reduced in
urban fringes by the high propensity of the affluent to "reside"
over considerable acreage • Teamed with large-lot zoning (which holds
down assessed values and property taxes), expensing of taxes arEl
interest, expensing of "conservation" investments, capital gains on
breeding stock, indefinite deferral of tax on sale of "residence,"
and a host of favors to deferred land increments (all to be treated
later), this exemption of imputed income serves greatly to fortify
the holdout power of landowners surrounding every city.
     It is true, of course, that buyers of new homes on this same
land would also enjoy the exemption of imputed land income, partially
neutralizing the bias. But there is normally a tax-bracket
                                   27
differential--appreciating suburban land gravitates to the strongest
hands. Higher prices mean higher credit barriers all around, screen-
ing out the poor. Where the new use is an apartment and the income
is taxable there is no offset at all-—that is, there is an unmitigated
or total bias against apartment owners and renters.

b.   Exemption of Unrealized Appreciation
     The form of income known as capital gains is rt taxed until
realized by sale.11 If the land is never sold, there is no tax.
Some landowners therefore prefer to lease ripe land rather than sell--
prominent examples are the Big Five of Oahu. Others prefer to buy
many years in advance of their own anticipated needs, even very
conjectural ones. When and if the needs materialize, they have on
tap needed land, now of high value, acquired at a low value. The
difference is tax-exempt income. The motive is strengthened by, and
mutually strengthens, the motive to acquire advance reserves of a
raw material whose supply is jeopardized by the absence of a vigorous
free market. The coml,ination magnifies the area of reserves which
individtials and finns find it advantageous to hold. Thus it raises
the holdout price of land.
c. Capital Gains at Death
     Capital gains taxes on appreciated assets are forgiven at death.
There are death taxes to pay instead, but these would also be due on
whatever other asset was substituted for appreciated land. It is
therefore very costly for individuals to sell any appreciated asset
during a period of several years before death; usually land is just
held off the market.
d. Bequests
     Eleenosynary bequests of appreciated land enjoy exemption from
capital gains tax; yet they are fully deductible at appraised value
for purposes of computing taxable income. Thus the taxpayer can

     11.   Eisner v. Macember, 252 U.S. 189 (1920), 40 S. Ct. 189.


                                  28
deduct a value which he has accumulated tax free, in addition to
enjoying the prestige and satisfaction of supporting his favorite
church, college, or foundation. This adds to the motives to hold
land for appreciation.
     Another aspect is the gift with life estate. Under this arrange—
rnent, the taxpayer deducts the appraised value at time of bequest,
but enjoys use of the home and grounds for life with no tax on the
imputed income. During this period he cannot sell and the land is
frozen.

e.   Capital Gains of Eleemosynary Owners

     Churches and other tax-exempt owners are normally not allowed
exemption on business-type, profit-making activities. The exception
is gains on land sales. The central city church that goes suburban
takes the full selling price along with it. Edified by the experi-
ence, the church will probably select a large site with ample grounds
and parking space, with one eye to future tax-free gains. It may buy
its future site years before it is ready to build. Cemetery associa-
tions especially are large land speculators which benefit from this
provision. The benefits from income tax exemption are usually coupled
with exemption from local property tax.


3.   DEFERRAL OP TAX ON REALIZED APPRECIATION

     Land value can appreciate in two ways. First, its value can
increase due to increased population and growth, which increases
the relative scarcity of its services. Second, inflation can
increase the money value of its services. Both these forces can
operate to increase the value of all assets, including those which
can be produced but which depreciate with use. However, land-—because
it does not depreciate with use, or because it is especially long
lived--possesses more potential to increase in value from these
forces.
     This characteristic of land combines with the "realization
doctrine" embedded in the Federal income tax to make the
long-period holding of land a very attractive tax shelter. The

                                 29
    essence of the realization doctrine is that gain cannot be taxed
    until the taxpayer actually realizes it through a sale or other
    explicit transaction. Appreciating land is Like a corporation that
    does not distribute profits to avoid taxation of dividends, but plows
    them back into capital and lets the shareholders realize the income
    at their tax convenience in the form of appreciated stock values at
    capital gains rates. This loophole for corporations has been
    recognized and somewhat compensated by the double taxation inherent in
    the corporate income tax. In the case of appreciating land, however,
    there is no such compensating device. There are rather a number of
    fortifying loopholes, discussed elsewhere.
         The desire of landholders to defer taxes on gains is often
    colloquially described as the "locked-in" effect. To show the force
    of the locked-in effect and its tendency to defer sale, Table 4
    shows how after-tax rates of return increase with holding periods.
            Table 4   is derived from a formula that assumes that selling
    price of land rises yearly at an assumed rate i. A tax rate, t,
    is applied to the excess of sales price in any year, (l+i)X, over
    cost of l at time zero. The landowner's rate of return after tax
    is r.
                             (l+r)X = (l+i)X (1-t) +t                       (1)
            Using a standard set of interest tables, Table 4 shows numerical
    examples    of how r rises with x, the year of sale.
         The speculator who sells in one year bears the full stated
    tax rate--his rate of return is halved, as the nominal tax rate of
    50 percent contemplates. The speculator who sells in 20 years bears
    less than three-fourths of the nominal tax rate. The old settler
    who waited 50 years bears less than half the tax rate.
            At the same time that investors seek to defer tax liabilities
    they seek to advance deductions. Here the landowner again receives
    favorable treatment because he deducts his holding costs as he spends
    the money--i.e., he "expenses" local land taxes and interest on borrowed
    money, even though the increment of land value which they finance will
    not be taxable for many years to come, if ever. Hence, even without
    preferential treatment of capital gains, the realization doctrine makes
                                          30



I
land an attractive investment. Taxation of realized gains at lower
capital gains rates makes holding land even more attractive. But even
if long term capital gains were treated as ordinary income, the reali-
zation doctrine would still make land holding attractive.
                                    Table 4
       AFTER-TAX RATE OF RETURN FOR DIFFERENT HOLDING PERIODSa

                                           Value of 1
                                          Compounded at
                                            After- Tax
                    Value of 1            Rate of Return
                 Compounded at 8%          for x Years       After-Tax
Year of Sale        for x years               (r.04)       Rate of Return
      x               l.08x                   (l+r?              r
      1                    1.080                1.04           .040
       5                   1.469                1.24           .043
      10                   2.159                1.58           .047
      15                   3.172                2.09           .050
      20                   4.661                2.83           .053
      25                   6.848                3.92           .056
      50                  46.902                23.95          .065
     100             2199.798                 1100.40          .072
                            ——                   ——            .080

     a. Based on the equation:
               (l+r)' =    (l+i)'
                                (l—t) +t =      l.08'
                                                 •
                                                   1/2 + 1/2 when
r is after-tax rate-of-return to land owner for different holding
periods, when the rate of appreciation before tax (i) is constant at
8%, tax rate (t) is 50%, and acquisition cost of $1 is deductible
in year of sale (x).


4.   DEFERRAL OF TAX BEIOND DATE OF SALE

a.    Sale of Residence
     If an owner sells a residence, the tax is deferred so long as he
buys another residence within a year. Under large lot zoning, five
or ten acres of grounds would probably qualify as part of the
"residence," although local administrative practice varies.

                                     31
b.   Deferral of Tax by Barter
     If the grounds qualify as a "farm" the owner can barter it, tax
free, for a larger "like property" further out of town. The new
owner has a higher basis--the appraised value at time of barter-—
and can subdivide and sell off without tax on the pre-barter increment.
Or he can hold for further appreciation, the tax on which he too can
defer in the same manner. Section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code
provides: "No gain or loss shall be recognized if property held for
productive use in trade or business or for investment (not including
stock, etc.) is exchanged solely for property of a like kind to be
held either for productive use in trade or business or for investment."
There is a good deal of "tailoring" of transactions to fit the letter
of Section 1031. An investor whose intent is to buy a suburban farm
for cash will first buy a rural farm, satisfactory to the prospective
seller, and then barter farms with him. Or he might buy other
suburban land for barter. The other land of "like kind" might also
be a golf course, dump, drive-in, airport, nursery, etc. A network
of brokers' clubs has developed to arrange such bartering. Thus a
ready avenue is open to suburban land speculators to defer taxation
of capital gains.
     Section 1031 is not an unmixed evil for low—income housing. It
unlocks some locked-in investors by letting them release their land
to commerce without tax penalty on the transaction. On the other
hand, it makes land speculating more attractive and so tends overall
to inflate the level of land prices. The seller, too, is still locked
into his "like property," which may be a rural farm--a big factor
inflating farm land prices--but may also be another suburban farm.
c.   Deferral by Installment Sale
     The affluent seller who is in no hurry for cash, or whose strong
credit enables him to obtain cash by borrowing, may defer tax on land
sale by the installment device. He must be the mortgagee. He must
not take a down payment of more than 30 percent of the selling price.
     An important incidental benefit of this method of sale is that
a large share of the interest on the deferred payments may be treated
as part of the contract price and receive capital gains rates. Only
a 4 percent rate must be treated as interest, at simple interest rates.
                                 32
Mortgage interest rates today are about double that, at compound
interest. So contract prices are inflated to reflect the buyer's
benefit from borrowing at 4 percent simple interest from the seller;
and the seller takes his interest above 4 percent at capital gains
rates.
       The longer the installment period, the greater the difference
between simple and compound interest. So sellers who can wait a
very long time for cash can get capital gains treatment on all
compound interest above 2 percent or 3 percent, depending on the
time involved.
      A variant of installment sale is the "land contract." The
seller instead of conveying title and taking a mortgage, retains title
until payments are completed. If payments come in slowly this method
is rather like rental, but with the tax benefit of capital gains
treatment for all payments on principal representing taxable gains
to the seller, and all interest payments above 4 percent simple.
Thus a good deal of oixiinary rent income receives capital gains
rates.

d.    Simple Prorating of Installment Payments between Interest and
      Principal
     Whenever a debt is paid off in level installments, the true
proportion which is interest is a maximum in the first year when the
unpaid balance is a maximum, and falls nearly to zero in the last
installment. The necessary sinking fund tables to find the true
proportion are the common property of bankers, and no deep mystery.
Simple prorating of level installments between interest and principal
theref ore constitutes a deferral of tax liability relative to an
accurate accounting--another benefit from installment sales.
e.    Contract Price Contingent on Buyer's Profits

      If the contract price is contingent on the buyer's profits from
the land, the seller need not prorate early payments between interest
and   recovery.   He treats all payments as nontaxable recovery of
principal until he has recovered his full basis; and only then does
he begin to pay taxes on his cash receipts.
                                    33
f.   Condemnation
     If land is condemned, as for highways or urban renewal, the tax
on gains is deferred if the unwilling seller reinvests in like prop-
erty within a year.


5.   DEFERRAL OF INCOME P1)M LAND USE

a.   "Implicit Expensing" of Foregone Income
     There is often an intertemporal dependence of land rents.
Sacrificing early rents to get higher later ones is a form of invest-
rnent, basically quite legitimate. However, the income tax biases
landowners toward more of this kind of investment, because the fore-
gone early rent is plowed back without ever having been received and
taxed.
     The effect is the same as though the early foregone rent were
received in cash and then reinvested, and granted the valuable tax
privilege of being expensed. This is "implicit expensing." Expensing
of capital investments, we have seen, is tantamount to 100 percent
exemption from income tax.
     An example of how implicit expensing decreases the availability
of land to builders is the following. As a district or neighborhood
fills in, the early builders establish a pattern of use. The more
of the land is developed, the more certain become the specifics of the
highest use of the remaining undeveloped land. Thus certainty improves
over time. This has always supplied a certain rationale for deferral
of land development, even before income tax rates were significant.
But now the early foregone rent--the investment in greater certainty--
is expensible (implicitly, that is.) This encourages individuals to
withhold land to achieve greater certainty. &Lnce the individual's
gain of certainty is achieved by imposing uncertainty on other land-
owners, there is no net social gain to justify a subsidy to this
kind of withholding.
     Another familiar example is the effort of large developers to
attract the highest possible stratum of the market, at the expense of

                                  34
some waiting. Early sales to wealthy buyers are thought. to tone up
a subdivision and erthance later sale prices, if not volume. Thus a
bias toward high pricing and slow sales results. The income tax
exaggerates it. The loss of potential income from idle land is
"implicitly expensed." The same reasoning applies to apartment
management which holds rents above the level that would fill the
building quickly. Implicit expensing is involved not merely in the
year-to-year management but in the original decision to put up a
building whose units cater to higher tastes than the broadest and
most frustrated stratum of the market can now afford.
     A third example is the new towns movement. These have ideal tax
shelter properties. Early operating losses are expensible; the final
payout is the land value increment, taxed very lightly. Many towns
have foundered by overestimating the increments and using too much
leverage,  but the point here is that the tax structure helps them
divert land from meeting the most urgently felt current needs in order
to prepare land for tomorrow's alleged needs as envisaged by the
founders, their advisers, and the aesthetic taste dictators
of the architectural haut monde. Too often they were rich ments
hobbies and status symbols.
     A fourth example is the California zoning device whereby large
landowners can have their development density measured as a whole.
They can raise density in parts of their land if they keep the average
down to the required level. Their response is to begin at densities
below the average, building up zoning "credits" to apply later to
apartments after the integrated development has become established.
The unreaped rents of the unused land, meantime, are implicitly ex-
pensed.

b.   Explicit Expensing of Early Operating Losses

     It is possible in several ways to appropriate control over
territory by establishing an early position. An example is the effort
of retailers to establish an early position in growing suburban
territory. Here the bias is toward premature development--but not of
housing, as a rule. How does this work?

                                 35
     Retailers establish new positions around every growing city.
Where there is room for only one store, or shopping center, or only
a few gas stations, to be there first is to establish a species of
franchise over the trade area, at least for several years. The
early losses are expensible; the taxable income is deferred, and
might even be taken as capital gain by sale of land.
     Thus, areas best suited for residential use are subject to
premature invasion by commerce, a higher use. The "floating value"
that results, diffused over wide areas, inflates values above the
residential level, without, however, raising them enough to stop the
commercial demand. This drives residential builders farther out,
where high density residential use establishes a floating value over
areas best suited for low density use.
    While the homesite seeker is thus pressed from above by the higher
use of commerce, he is pressed from below by the farming   interests which
also enjoy extraordinary privileges. "Farmers" may expense many
capital investments in soil and water "conservation." The gentlemen
farmers who sink money in farms have become a conspicuous case in
point.   A recent U.S.D.A. study, based on 1963 tax returns, shows
that most wealthy taxpayers who own farms report farming losses.
Of 3.2 million individuals who filed tax returns including farm income,
66,000 reported combined farm and non-farm incomes over $25,000.12
Of this top group two-thirds reported farm losses. Their alleged tax
losses are only current. They are expensed from ordinary   income,
usually urban, to be recouped later at capital gains rates by sale of
a greatly improved farm. Soil and water conservation are likely to
hold the land in agriculture until the tax-motivated farm improvements
have been used for farming.
     The cost of establishing orchards also is expensible, and the
unrealized rent of the land used for an orchard's early nursery years

     12. Edward I. Reinsel, Farm and Off-Farm Income Reported     on
Federal Tax Returns (ERS-USDA, ERS-383), August, 1968, p. 25.



                                  36
enjoys implicit expensing. The competitive strength of horticulture
against housing is thus enhanced.

6.   SUMMARY ON THE FEDERAL INCOME TAX

     It seems reasonable to assert that the Federal income tax
operates in such a way as to encourage land holdout and so increase
urban land prices. It also stimulates consumption of owner occupied
housing and land by income tax payers. It stimulates, through
accelerated depreciation, construction of office buildings and rental
apartments for moderate and high income renters. Each of these
factors, by forcing up the price of land, impacts unfavorably upon
housing costs for low-income individuals.
     It is tempting to suggest changes in the Federal tax system
that would "improve"   this situation as it applies to housing. The
present Federal tax system is exceedingly complex: changes in one
part of the system usually create inequities or difficulties in other
parts. To close one man's loophole makes the remaining ones stand
out even more; and to eliminate one set of the loopholes or shelters
while leaving others untouched may itself be a form of inequity.
Nothing short of a sweeping reform of  the entire system may suffice
to restore some semblance of neutrality to the impact of the Federal
tax system as it affects land use and housing, and a number of other
elements of our economic system. It may be concluded, however, that
land income receives unusually favorable tax treatment; that the
favors are granted in such ways as to encourage land holdout and
price inflation; and that there is probably scope for legitniate
reduction of housing costs, without subsidy, via review and revision
of the income tax features discussed in this paper.




                                  37
