              The Role of Ground Rent in
               Urban Decay and Revival
              How to Revitalize a Failing City
                           By MASON GAFFNEY*


                                 Introduction
You MAY THINK me an outlander but my parents were New York-
ers and never forgot it. One grandfather even went to St. John's,
although not this St. John's—it's what they once called Fordham in
the Bronx, now one of those dying cities we need to revive. He
was to become a priest and lead the celibate life. As you see, he
was not equal to the calling. His official obit tactfully says, "After
leaving college he enlisted in the U.S. Navy," but Aunt Fan wrote
privately, "Papa left Fordham before finishing and went to Califor-
nia where he taught school. Fordham required mostly brawn, he
said." Violence here is not new.
 He married late, so late a young man like me has a grandfather
who served in the Big War. That is not remarkable except that
means the Civil War. Ours is a family of long generations. My other
grandfather, the Yankee Presbyterian, lived in Brooklyn Heights
when that was a suburb for stockbrokers, and that goes way back
too.
  Now these old timers, to whom the past was only yesterday,
spoke always of New York City as the center of civilization. It was
a livable, optimistic place—a great, growing, vibrant, trend setting,
prospering, cultural city. A little crooked, sure, and great-
grandfather was probably no saint at paving streets for Tammany
Hall. But it had a present and a future, a life and a soul, not like the
dead-end hopeless despair of today's Bronx.



  Professor of Economics, university of California at Riverside.
58                       The Path to Justice

                     Henry George
BUT WE'RE HERE to talk of the future. I'd like to see those good
times and better ones come again, preferably without the graft.
And we're here to review the ideas of another commuter between
New York and California, Henry George, and how his ideas might
be used to revive dead cities. Henry George was a journalist who
taught himself economics. He had a flowing pen and a brilliant
mind, and his book, Progress and Poverty, became and remains
the all-time best seller in economics.
  People remember him today not for the volume of his sales, but
for the enduring quality of his ideas and proposals. The reform
program he worked out combines the magic of incentive with the
magic ofjustice. It comprises a plan not just to revitalize cities but
to reunify society.
  George's fans have boosted him for the Hall of Fame. It is ironic
he never made it. Not that he would have cared, a stone face was
not his style. The irony is that the Hall of Fame is now decaying
and abandoned in the Bronx, a setting also decaying and aban-
doned for failure to use George's formula for keeping cities
healthy and robust. The Hall of Fame in the Bronx exemplifies a
malignant propensity to pour the national treasure into dead
monuments while their living matrices starve, rot, and crumble.
For further evidence, tour the purlieus of your state Capitol, con-
trasting the vulgar ostentation on the marbled side of the street
with the squalid reality on the living side.

                       Dead and Dying Cities
WHAT ARE THESE moribund cities? Some extreme cases are East St.
Louis, Camden, Benton Harbor (Michigan), Ford Heights (Illinois),
along with Robbins, Harvey, Gary, and Newark.
  But more commonly and generally, large parts of once vibrant
cities are half dead, seriously blighted and trending downwards.
One of these is the South Bronx, which New Yorkers know well
enough to avoid knowing any better. In Milwaukee, it is the near
north side, called locally the "inner core," a galloping blight whose
area I have seen triple in the last 20 years while Milwaukee's
•                  Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                 59

    population dropped 20 percent. In Chicago, it is South State Street,
    only a few blocks from the Madison Street crossing which for gen-
    erations was the most valuable corner in the nation. In Tampa, it is
    Ybor City.
      Note that blight is not restricted to stagnant or declining regions
    and cities. In booming Los Angeles, there is Watts. In nearby Riv-
    erside, California, one of the fastest growing cities in the nation,
    the central business district (CBD) is surrounded by blight which,
    among other things, frustrates years of subsidies aimed at reviving
    the moribund CBD itself.
      But let us sound deeper to gauge the full mass of this iceberg.
    These extreme cases are not just anomalies. They are more than
    ghettoes and embarrassments; they are symptoms of systemic
    malfunction. They could be portents and symbols for the rest of
    the economy. Blight may be defined as a failure to maintain, to
    replace, and to renew the capital inherited from the past. Many
    studies of American industry indicate that it has this problem,
    compared with vigorous foreign competitors. In learning to cure
    blight, we may learn to restore the greatness and pride in this
    whole troubled nation.

                         Cities that Have Revived
    THERE IS GOOD news too; some cities have risen from the grave.
    Indeed, all land development is resurrection in some sense; all
    land has been used before by someone for something from the
    beginning. Trace the history of any city lot, and you'll usually find
    there were several antecedent improvements, layered like the ru-
    ins of ancient Troy. It is a matter of making renewal happen faster
    and more widely, while we are still here to benefit.
      Germany and Japan recovered from World War II with breath-
    taking speed. Atlanta even recovered from General Sherman too,
    although in its own courtly time. Chicago burned almost com-
    pletely in 1871 leaving 90,000 people homeless, but recovered
    without breaking stride. San Francisco and Anchorage recovered
    from devastating earthquakes. Washington, D.C. recovered from
    the 14th Street riots and arson. The basics were right; the locations
    remained good. The disasters may even have helped by forcing
60                      The Path to Justice

the demolition of obsolescent capital and releasing land for re-
building. "Instant urban renewal" is more than street jive; it can be
true perception.
  But some other revivals, less dramatic and publicized, are more
impressive and relevant to us because they are revivals from nor-
mal decay and obsolescence, pushed along by good public pol-
icy, which we can analyze and replicate. There is Southfield,
Michigan, bordering on Detroit and thriving and flourishing as fast
as its parent central city is dying. There is Rosslyn, Virginia, just
across the Potomac from D.C., a forest of high-rises that rose up
while Washington was burning and derelict during the 1960s.
There is Sacramento, California, whose once-depressing center
has found new life. There is Pittsburgh, of grimy repute, recently
named the most livable U.S. city. There are Hong Kong, Singapore,
and Taipei, once best known as rather fetid ports of call, now
three of the "Four Tigers" of Southeast Asia.
  In all those modern success stories of economic and social re-
vitalization, we find the hand of Henry George at work, if we seek
out the local politics and policies. In Taipei, we learn they are
guided by the philosophy of Dr. Sun Yat-Sen, and if we read Dr.
Sun, we find he was an enthusiastic Georgist convert. In Pitts-
burgh, we find a "graded tax plan," applied, framed, and sup-
ported by something called The Henry George Foundation.
Throughout Pennsylvania today, we now see several smaller cities
emulating Pittsburgh's partial application of George's policies:
Harrisburg, Scranton, McKeesport, New Castle, Washington, and
Duquesne. Fortune reviewed their progress favorably in a 1983
article. Recently, steel-depressed Aliquippa signed on too, as did
Clairton. These once declining cities bear close watching today as
they bounce back.
  Then there are cities of explosive growth after slow periods.
These include Sydney and Johannesburg, both notable for their
use of Georgist policies. Whatever their social faults, these two
cities have burgeoned to become the economic capitals of their
respective continents, an economic achievement hard to dismiss.
There are several other good examples, like Nairobi in East Africa
and Brisbane and Auckland in the Antipodes. Many cities of west-
ern Canada, including Edmonton, Saskatoon, Victoria, New
                Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                61

Westminster, and Vancouver, grew up with partial use of Georgist
policies in the early 2Oth century. Less explicit application of Geor-
gist policies was made informally (through assessment discrimi-
nation) by Seattle, Portland, San Diego, Houston, San Francisco,
and many other growing western cities during the same period.
   It is good to know degeneration and failure are not our predes-
tined fate. We may choose them, but we may also choose renewal
and success. It's a matter of attitude and know-how.

                   Why Cities Should Be Revived
SOME CITIES AND towns may and should be abandoned. Camps and
towns around played-out mines are obvious examples. Some
small farm towns and hamlets become redundant when roads let
customers range farther and patronize the larger or better towns.
Salvage what you can and move on.
  Some would apply the same logic to all cities. Dead cities aren't
lost, they say, but are just rebuilt elsewhere. They were cash cows
that have been milked dry, meaning their depreciation allowances
are reinvested on new frontiers and the people and vitality moved
with the capital. That's a clever and important half-truth; but re-
member a half-truth is also half wrong. The basic original site stays
put; land can't move. A lot of costly social capital, public and pri-
vate, can't move either.
  We have little room left for throwaway cities in this finite world.
New natural sites aren't that common. There is only one water
level route west along the Mohawk, only one Hudson Valley with
only one mouth, and here New York City has stood for 350 years.
We can't really afford to kiss off the Bronx and build a duplicate
environment elsewhere. We can't rebuild the natural setting at all,
and the sunken social capital is too costly: shipping, docks, rails,
the New York Thruway, airports, streets, expressways, subways,
water lines, power lines, sewer lines, gas lines, phone lines,
churches, schools, bridges, tunnels, museums, Halls of Fame, uni-
versities . .
  Of course, we can replace the Bronx out at the east end of the
Long Island Expressway, but that means not only duplicating the
micro-infrastructure but adding the Expressway and correspond-
62                       The Path to Justice

ing trunk lines for all the utilities, and paying the price or com-
muting in time, fuel, pollution, auto and tire purchases, repairs,
paint jobs, insurance, gridlock, and traffic casualties. And then ul-
timately, when we tire of the new suburbs, where do we go next?
  Look at the Earth from a lunarcraft photo. There is only so much,
and we already have a big portion of the best temperate zone. This
is our Promised Land. "Don't blow it," God keeps telling Israel in
the Bible. "Don't think I'm giving you another Promised Land if
you can't handle this one." It seems a reasonable attitude. Nor are
other nations disposed to give up their crowded slices of this
small, scarce Earth for us.
  Furthermore, these blighted areas have high potential market
values. Picture a topographic map of a city where the contour
lines represent points, not of equal elevation but equal market
value per square foot (psf). On this kind of topo map, the peaks,
the Everests and McKinleys, are in the city retail centers where just
one square foot rises to $2,000 (that's about $90 million per acre,
and an acre is about 91 yards on a football gridiron). Land just a
few miles or blocks away from such dizzying altitudes can hardly
be worthless. Harlem is near Park Avenue; Watts is near Beverly
Hills; South State Street is very near the Sears Tower. Newark is 15
minutes by train from Manhattan. Newark office rents are $25 psf
per year. That is less, of course, than in Manhattan, but in River-
side, California we are throwing up offices to get rent of $12 psf
per year while Newark stagnates.
  The capital you invest that earns $25 psf is more productive, ob-
viously, than that yielding $12 psf. I don't mean the capital in the
floor atop the high-rise, because that is likely to cost $25 psf (in
annualized terms) to build and operate. I mean the capital in the
middle and bottom floors, which costs less to build but rents for as
much and yields a surplus. To get more such middles and bot-
toms, and the corresponding surpluses, renew more land in those
neglected areas of high potential like Newark. Not to renew those
lands is to waste those potential surpluses. Each year's loss is lost
forever, for the services of land perish with the passage of time.
  Shall we treat the Bronx as a residence of last resort for people
who can't afford anything decent? That's hardly necessary. To
many people, cities are the Big Apple—desirable locations of
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                   63

positive values and strong magnetism. Rich foreigners come from
around the world and pay top dollar to locate in Manhattan, not
because they have to, but because they want to. So it is too with
San Francisco, Miami Beach, Beverly Hills, Newport Beach, Cam-
bridge, and Georgetown. If they want open country, there is
plenty left in North Dakota, Texas, and Nevada—but they want
cities.
  Urban revival works best when a healthy piece remains on
which to anchor new development. In the worst scenario, no such
place remains, but even Camden has Campbell Soup. Newark has
a great airport, a new Hartz Mountain Industrial Park, and the Pm-
dential. Life is persistent and resilient. Vital seedlings keep
sprouting; they only want sunshine, water, care, and cultivation.

                        The Urban Surplus
ONE OF THE reasons we remember Henry George was his pio-
neering work on cities, how they work and what good they do.
Previous economists showed limited or no understanding of loca-
tion value and its causes. Even Heinrich von Thunen, father of lo-
cation theory, approached cities in an arid, antiseptic way that left
out most of the sperm and egg, enzyme and ferment that today we
call urban linkages and synergy. George was a mensch, like Holly
Whyte or Jane Jacobs, seeing cities in intensely human, interactive
terms.
  George saw cities as foci of communication, cooperation, so-
cialization, and exchange, which he considered the basis of civili-
zation. He saw cities as the new frontier, an endless series of new
frontiers, because the city as a whole enjoys increasing returns.
The presence of people with good mutual access associating on
equal terms expedites cooperation and specialization through the
market. Multivariate interactions in cities are synergistic. Indeed,
while each part—each parcel of land—is developed in the stage of
decreasing returns, the composite city is generally in a stage of
increasing returns, thanks to synergy. The whole is greater than
the sum of its parts; and increases to the whole yield more than
the sum of increases to the parts.
64                       The Path to Justice

  This synergistic surplus, says George, lodges in urban land rents.
Thus he explained an outstanding phenomenon of his times,
which other economists were overlooking completely: the unpar-
alleled rise of urban rents and land prices, and the wealth and
power of the owners.
  To the investor in a building, it looks like this. The first $10,000
he spends yields him 30 percent or $3,000; but he pays ten percent
interest or $1,000, leaving him a surplus of $2,000. To acquire the
superior location that confers that surplus, he'll pay up to $2,000
annually, which means he'll pay up to $20,000 for title to the land
(at ten percent, $20,000 will cost him $2,000/year).
  Of course, the next $10,000 he spends may yield him more than
ten percent, say 20 percent, conferring more surplus and adding
more value to the land. But the idea is the same. He'll add to the
building until the last unit of $10,000 yields him just ten percent,
enough to pay interest and no more. (You have just taken a flying
tour through the theory of diminishing marginal productivity.)
  To understand ground rents and land prices is to understand
cities; not to understand is to remain mired forever in confusion
and fallacy, to be gulled and misled and bamboozled, which is,
indeed and alas, the common lot of mankind. Let it not be yours.
  These ground rents are annual, they continue forever, and they
generally tend to rise. To buy title to land, therefore, people pay
prices that look very high relative to current cash flow. In River-
side, California, a city of low density and 208,000 people, land
prices go up to $18 per square foot. In San Francisco, a city of high
density and 800,000 people, prices go up over $1,000 per square
foot. In Manhattan, they go over $2,000. In Tokyo, probably the
top of the line, one sale is reported at $25,000 per square foot.1 An
official agency has appraised the top value at $20,000 per square
foot, although this may be puffed up. But $25,000 per square foot
is high enough; urban land prices take your breath away.
   Land prices vary extremely from city to city and block to block.
The actual cost of building a square foot of floor space is fairly
constant from place to place, but demand varies with location. A
small rise of floor space rentals translates into a large percentage
rise of ground rent and land price, because rent gets everything
above what is required to operate and amortize the building.
                  Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                65

   Thus in Riverside at a small neighborhood mall, a floor space
rental of $12 per square foot just pays for the building with only a
little left over to pay for land, resulting in land prices of perhaps $5
to $8 per square foot. In Manhattan, rentals are triple or quadruple
those in Riverside with all the surplus going to ground rent, re-
sulting in land prices up to $2,000 per square foot, which are
about 300 times higher than Riverside.
  This is due to several factors. One is "leverage." Say the annual-
ized costs of constructing and operating a building are $11 per
square foot, whether in Riverside or Manhattan. That leaves $1 per
square foot for ground rent in Riverside ($12—$11), and $37 per
square foot in Manhattan ($48—$1 1). This factor alone makes Man-
hattan land worth 37 times Riverside land.
  A second factor is intensity. At the higher level of floor rents in
Manhattan, it pays to pack more floor space per acre, with high-
rise buildings. Also, in Manhattan there is little need to provide
workers and customers with parking space, while in Riverside six
square feet of free parking are often required for each square foot
of floor space.
  Other factors are the greater pooling of demand in the bigger
metropolis, which steadies its flow and gives more assurance of its
continuation and predictability. The commercial vacancy rate in
Riverside is pushing 30 percent.
  In bigger cities at key locations, land prices are not just high per
square foot; they are higher per capita than in small cities. Sur-
prisingly, they are even higher relative to building values in spite
of the high rise buildings. Remember each added floor until the
top one adds more ground rent, because floor space rentals are
more than enough to cover the added cost.
  Urban land is also highly concentrated in ownership, meaning a
handful of people and corporations own most of it. It is heavily
favored by absentees of great wealth who want to diversify their
holdings and acquire stable, secure wealth they can manage by
remote control, so today a growing share of income property is
held by aliens. Aliens even hold a good deal of residential prop-
erty in selected communities of international jet-set ambiance and
repute, places like Palm Beach, La Jolla, Greenwich, Belvedere, or
Beverly Hills.
66                      The Path to Justice

  In comparing cities and neighborhoods, land prices are much
more differentiated than other measures economists commonly
cite. The median income in Upper East Side Manhattan is about
eight times higher than that north of Central Park. But the price of
land per square foot is probably 40 times higher. Margaret Reid
presents many more contrasts of the same kind (Reid 1962); 50
does Harold Brodsky in his studies of Washington, D.C. (Brod-
sky:239).2

                       Sharing the Surplus
URBAN RENTS ARE a social surplus, not a payment in reward for
anyone's making or supplying land. So others than the landowner
have a claim. A good deal of American politics deals with how to
assert that claim and share that surplus.
   It seems a pleasant enough problem, cutting up a big pie. The
ancient Chinese knew better: "It is easier to face a common enemy
than share a surplus," Confucius said. The common ways of shar-
ing this surplus are clumsy, divisive, and destructive. They bear
some responsibility for dead cities. With too much quarreling and
gouging over spoils, there are no more spoils to dispute. Macauley
wrote nostalgically in Lays of Ancient Rome: "Then lands were
fairly portioned; then spoils were fairly sold. The Romans were
like brothers, in the brave days of old." The same might be said of
New Englanders in the early 17th century, whose traditions we still
honor in word and name. But we have come a long way from
brotherhood. Let us see how spoils are shared now, and then how
we might do better.

                         Looting and Graft
Looting is sharing by direct action. We had a bellyful of that in
1967, and its destructiveness needs no homily. Graft and patron-
age, the basis of ethnic-populist political machines, are more tem-
pered kinds of looting which destroy incentives more quietly and
insidiously. Featherbedding, stealing, parasitic behavior of all
kinds, all cut into the surplus. The problem is they are blindly in-
discriminate; they cut into productive incentives, too. But the more
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                  67

the surplus the more the temptation—the easier is the self-
righteousness that rationalizes looting and graft.

                            Rent Control

Rent control shares the surplus with tenants. It is a tempting route
and several cities follow it, including New York. Why not? Renters
are the majority. Many landlords are rich and remote; they work
through layers of faceless minions so you probably don't even
know their names. The managers are tough and tight so you have
a lot of abuse and negligence to avenge. Supply is inelastic, at least
in the short run, so the owners can't cut and run. Poetic justice is
served. But there are several spots on this policy.
  • Limited number of beneficiaries. The original tenants carve
    out an equity in the landlord's estate, but the benefits spread
    no wider. Tenants may, and many do, sublet to others, be-
    coming landlords themselves. Rent control is at best a zero-
    sum game among the few, not a social reform.
  • Lower incentive to maintain supply. It becomes unattractive
    to build new rental units. At first, these are allowed higher
     rents but are vulnerable to future caps. So rent control is
     worse than a zero-sum game; it becomes negative-sum.
        What rent control confiscates is not just land-income, but
     building-income too. Land is fixed, but buildings need main-
     taining and replacing which they will not get if there is no
     return. Too, land can be reallocated to uncontrolled uses; we
     all know about condominiumization. The new wrinkle in
     Santa Monica is to buy a rent-controlled apartment building
     cheap and convert it to a single-family residence for the new
     owner.
   • Wasted space. Tenants lose much incentive to economize on
     space, because it is underpriced to them. In the extreme,
     some tenants move away, but retain the apartment to use a
     few weeks of the year.
   • New class society. Old renters become a privileged class vis-
     à-vis new ones in new units, which are temporarily uncon-
     trolled or controlled at a higher level. With the lower new
68                       The Path to Justice

     supply and wasted space, uncontrolled rents are forced up
     above the free market level.
   • Owner/tenant clashes. An owner's main goal under rent con-
     trol is to evict and repossess. The resulting nastiness and in-
     timidation have become routine, and the war stories legen-
     dary. In Tokyo, outright extortion and violence are frequent
   • Aborted incentive to maintain and improve. Landlords lose all
     economic motive to serve and to maintain, let alone to im-
     prove. Tenants retaining precarious tenures have at most very
     limited motivation even to maintain, let alone improve prop-
     erty.
  • Dogged obstructionism. A sitting tenant cannot gain by site
    renewal, but only faces eviction. Tenants therefore fight it
     every way they can. A class is created of dogged self-
    righteous obstructionists with a vested interest in the status
    quo, however obsolescent, however decayed, however in-
    appropriate to the site.
  • Undertaxation. The equity that tenants carve out of the land-
    lord's estate has no market value, because it is inalienable (at
    least legally). Assessed values therefore drop, and tax yields
    drop correspondingly. The new privileged class not only gets
    preferential low rents, but also avoids contributing any share
    to support public services. The resulting higher tax burdens
    are dumped on others; the worsened public services are suf-
     fered by all.
  Rent control is usually conceived of in terms of urban land, but
the principle applies to other resources as well. I have personal
familiarity with the perverse effects of capping the price of both
water and energy.
  I'm a small farmer with shares in a canal company, and the
shares give me the right to receive water far below the market
price but no right to sell my water. So my fellow shareholders and
I do the only thing the law allows: we waste water and collectively
create that chronic artificial crisis called the southern California
water shortage. I'd be better off to have the state tax the water,
raise the rates, and use the money to raise the salaries of—well,
how about University of California professors?
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                69

  The Federal Power Commission (now FERC) has long done the
same thing with gas and earlier with oil, capping the field prices.
Their Chief Economist, David Schwartz, opened my eyes to the
moving spirit behind the policy when he joined a conference I
sponsored in Vancouver. Our subject was how British Columbia
(B.C.) might best collect rents from gas flowing from provincially
owned wells. Dave Schwartz is a likable gentleman, selflessly
dedicated to the public weal, but he grew impatient and finally
blurted, "Lets not collect rent; let's cap the price and eliminate
rent." That one foolish remark suddenly flashed more light onto 20
years of FPC regulation than tomes of NBER studies. They actually
had so little understanding as to believe and act on that notion. By
doing so they contrived to create, among other problems, the
great gasoline shortage of the 1970s.
  The rationale with housing, water, and energy all three is that
these basics are too important to leave to the market and must be
price-controlled. The result is to create systems of regulation much
worse than anything a market could accomplish. Around 1973,
there was also a great coffee crisis, a dearth of raisins, and even a
crisis in toilet paper. These were too unimportant to regulate so
their prices rose, demand fell, supply rose, and the crises quickly
disappeared without a trace or a memory. Rent control ensures
that we will not ever overcome the housing crisis so simply or at
all.

                  "French Equity" (Equity in Kind)
Under the Code Napoleon, every French testator must divide his
real estate equally among all children. There is no substituting
money for land; the Code requires equity in kind, and nothing else
will do. The resulting fine subdivision is called morcellement, and
the Code demands it with no regard for efficiency. It goes further.
Each heir must get an equal share of land of each quality: mead-
owlands, pastureland, woodland, etc. The even finer subdivision is
called parcellement, which was once carried (like most human
error) to absurd lengths.
  Today, we approach "French Equity" indirectly and expensively.
First, we distribute the land haphazardly, but then seek to make
70                       The Path to Justice

every parcel as good as every other. We do so by extending public
utilities and roads to every parcel on the same terms, regardless of
location and differential costs of service. A familiar example is the
U.S. Postal Service, and it has given its name to this kind of pricing,
called by economists "postage stamp pricing." Here are some
quick examples.
     B.C. Ferry Service. This socialized system has two main lines
     to its Big Apple that make money: Vancouver-Victoria and
     Vancouver-Nanaimo. But the whole system hardly breaks
     even because there are some dozen lesser lines serving small
     islands and peninsulas. The worst of these costs $12 for every
     dollar of revenue. The losses are made up from the profits of
     the trunk lines. The generic name for that is cross-subsidy.
     B.C. Hydro. This socialized power system serves the entire
     province, an area so vast it exceeds those of California, Ore-
     gon, and Washington combined. Its rates are uniform
     throughout. Half of the people live in Vancouver at high den-
     sity and are cheap to serve. A few live up north on the Yukon
     border where (I surmise) it costs several hundred dollars to
     earn one dollar of revenue. That is cross-subsidy.
  • Water and sewer service in Milwaukee County, Wisconsin.
    Here the city investments have been captured, controlled,
    and milked by suburban interests, with a lot of help from the
    state legislature. Capacity in the city plants is taken up to
    serve the suburbs, and capital is poured into long intercep-
    tors (trunk lines) linking suburban land developments to city
     plants. That is cross-subsidy and has been called worse things.
  • College and university campuses. The legislative ethic de-
    mands something for every electoral district. Not every as-
    semblyman requires a college campus, for there are other
    prizes too, but the horse trading process seems to spawn too
    many. Just now we have eight UC Campuses, most of them
    with excess land, a few with excess floor space. Faced with
    rising enrollment, the preferred solution in Sacramento is not
     the lower-cost option of intensifying, improving, and staffing
     existing campuses, but the higher cost option of creating new
     ones. Each will enrich some influential land speculator and
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                 71

    tantalize a hundred others who are busy lobbying for the new
    spoils.
    Water supply in California. To summarize a complex tale, the
    low real cost of serving older settled areas is passed on to
    new settlements through an accounting device called "meld-
    ing," a nice name for shutting your eyes and stirring all the
    accounts in the same pot. Melding passes through several
    levels: a state wholesaler serves the Metropolitan district,
    which serves local districts that serve cities. But the net result
    I have calculated is this: at the end of the line in Riverside, it
    costs society $1,800 to serve the marginal acre-foot (a unit of
    water) which sells for $20. That is cross-subsidy. It is worth
    fortunes to people developing land at the end of the line; the
    cost is spread over everyone else so they won't notice. Pro-
    fessors are supposed to keep quiet about it, but some of us
     never learn the rules.
     Postal service. How we love to dump on the postal service for
     raising rates and to moralize about the inefficiency of gov-
     ernment. But do the harassed clerks really deserve the entire
     onus? Manhattan has 64,000 residents per square mile, plus
     the daytime population; Montana has 5.4 per square mile. It
     obviously costs a lot more to collect and deliver the mail in
     Montana. The main reason postal rates rise is because the
     whole U.S. urban population is spreading out more like
     Montana and less like Manhattan (which once had over
     100,000 per square mile). Henry Schechter calls it the "cost-
     push of urban sprawl."

                 What's Wrong with "French Equity'?

There are two big problems with cross-subsidy as an approach to
equity. First, it is not equitable; second, it is wasteful and ineffi-
cient.
  The kind of equity achieved by regional cross-subsidies is not
interpersonal, but inter-regional. It is something like Washington's
programs of "foreign aid," which tax poor people in rich countries
to aid rich people in poor countries. Some of the main beneficiar-
72                       The Path to Justice

ies are among the richest people and corporations in the country
and world.
  Here are a few who hold speculative land and enjoy subsidies
on the growing fringes of southern California. Largest is probably
The Irvine Company, owned by Donald Bren, among the 20 rich-
est Americans on Forbes' latest list. This company holds some
70,000 acres in Orange County, including and surrounding New-
port Beach, Irvine, and Corona del Mar. Others include Robert
Campeau, who recently acquired Federated Department Stores;
Chevron; Edward J. De Bartolo, also high on Forbes' list; Kaiser
Development Bedford Properties; Connecticut General Life; Mo-
bil; Lusk Realty; Bell Canada; Southern Pacific; Union Pacific;
Cadillac Fairview (Olympia and York); Bank of Montreal; the Hunt
oil family; and Newhall Land. The list goes on, but you see the
point. Equity is not served by milking middle class neighborhoods
to enrich owners like these. "Public works for private gain" is bad
enough, but worse when the profiteers are already the richest.
  How about efficiency? Subsidy creates waste in the amount of
the subsidy, almost by definition. Spread City, by the New York
Regional Plan Association, estimated that the social cost of creat-
ing one new lot at the metropolitan fringe is four times (4x) the
value of the lot (and that is probably an underestimate, for the
truth is so awful many readers would block it out or blame the
messenger for the bad news). Why do people develop lots worth
only one quarter of their cost? Because other people are paying
the other three-quarters.
  This process does transfer ground rent from areas of overcharge
to areas of undercharge. But in the process, it simply destroys
much of the ground rent, a process known to economists as "dis-
sipation of rent." To spread the surplus, we lose much of it.
  Being neither equitable nor efficient, has "French Equity" any
kind of merit? Once it passed for a way to make jobs, in the salad
days of J. M. Keynes, when he actually urged waste as a route to
full employment. Those ideas are now dormant, but we still don't
have the feel of it. If we had to fire a few teachers or policemen
each time some city council yields to a major campaign donor and
extends utilities to his raw acres, we would better sense the true
cost of these "public works for private profit."
                Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                   73

                 Sharing Surpluses Constructively
IT IS IN fact possible to mobilize the social rent surplus and put it to
good use without waste. It is possible to create a just society of
people unified and bound together in mutual satisfaction with the
terms of their association, without contempt for their own gov-
ernment.
   People do care about justice, always have and always will. They
have funny ways of showing it sometimes: just now we're ab-
sorbing the "me generation," but this too shall pass. The problem
is the older sharing-caring generations did some fuzzy thinking
and foisted on us some clumsy, wasteful, and counter-productive
ways to share and care, including substantial exploitation of the
new generation they now brand as selfish. The "me generation"
reacts against the stupidity and hypocrisy, not the noble impulse
itself.
  Rent will be shared, one way or another. Chicago economists
preach that economists should only care about getting resources
allocated efficiently to maximize the national product. "Entitle-
ments" they say are arbitrary and don't much matter, just so they
are clear and definite and everyone knows exactly what he owns
and can trade it freely. In practice, that means leave them as they
are today, whatever their origins. But life doesn't work that way.
Eager supplicants swarm around rent like flies around fresh pie.
  The key to renewing cities is shifting from obstmctive ways of
sharing rent, like rent control, and the destructive ways, like loot-
ing and cross-subsidy, to constructive ways.

                   George's Constructive Program
THIS BRINGS US to Henry George, for whom these lectures are
named. He showed us how equity and efficiency go hand in hand:.
how to combine the magic off ustice with the magic of incentive.
  First, by George, equity need not be in kind, that's clumsy. Use
the monetary mechanism, that's what it's for. If you and your
brother and two cousins inherit a house sized for one family, you
don't crowd all four families in; you sell and divide the money. Or
one buys out the others. There is equity in money as well as real
74                       The Path to Justice

estate. Money is often better; you can reinvest it anywhere. It puts
your house on a magic carpet to follow you around. Money is
wonderful! (Just take care not to blow it.)
  Second, by George, use the tax mechanism. Don't divide land
into unusable morsels; don't shackle the market with rent controls;
don't dissipate rent in cross-subsidies. But turn land over to the
highest bidder, and tax ground rents to support government.
  Taxing ground rent produces a range of social dividends. First, it
overcomes the traditional trade-off between equity and efficiency
by achieving both simultaneously. Second, it promotes renewal by
permitting a reduction of taxes on buildings. Third, it encourages
construction by reducing the liquidity constraints on developers of
new buildings. Fourth, it produces synergistic effects (i.e., in-
creases productivity) through positive spillover effects in the sur-
rounding region. Fifth, it promotes better stewardship and more
efficient land use by encouraging owner-occupancy. Sixth, it
stimulates capital formation. Seventh, it encourages economy and
discourages corruption in government.
  Those are strong claims. Can economic policy do everything?
No, but those are the things it can do, as I will explain more fully
below. The basic impulse, however—the striving for justice and
brotherhood and the sense of personal ethics—those come from
within, from family, community, schools, and religion. So too does
the sense of workmanship, the striving for excellence and com-
petence, without which no system works.

         The Primaiy Effect. Reconciles Efficiency and Equity
We've always heard that taxes destroy incentives. Economist Cohn
Clark said years back that the country would fall when taxes ex-
ceeded 25 percent of income. Arthur Laffer said tax yields would
actually fall if rates rise, and rise if rates fall.
  The news in Henry George is we can tax all the rent out of land
and not one square foot will walk away. Nor will God switch off
the Creation. Man creates capital by saving; some Other Force cre-
ated land and sustains and serves it every day the sun rises, unde-
terred by taxes.
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                75

   Nor will Georgist taxes leave owners sulking on their land, but
the contrary. Fortune headlines them as "Higher Taxes that Pro-
mote Development" (Breckenfeld 1983). The tax is a fixed charge
based on land's market value, derived in turn from its opportunity
cost. The owner will use it harder and improve it more to meet the
fixed tax. If he doesn't care to do that—if he has more than he can
use—he will sell, releasing surplus land to meet the demands of
others, of whom there are many with urgent needs and many
more with enterprise wanting more space. Taxes stifle enterprise
only if they increase with enterprise. Land taxes increase only with
opportunity cost, which is independent of the enterprise of the
individual owner. The only incentive this tax impairs is the incen-
tive to withhold land from use.3
   George's land tax promotes equity toward the landless in at least
four ways: (1) it relieves them of taxes, to the extent that landown-
ers pay more, (2) it supplies them with more goods and services as
land is used better, (3) it offers them jobs producing those same
goods and services, and incomes with which to buy these, and (4)
it offers them a better chance to acquire land themselves, as sur-
pluses are released to the market.
   This is supply side economics with a real kick. It works through
tax transformation rather than tax reduction—the total tax take
may be raised or lowered as a separate issue. If desired, we can
raise taxes and stimulate supply together; there is no hard choice
to make between them.
   So George's simple program not only reconciles efficiency and
equity, it squares taxes and incentives. What more can a reason-
able person demand of economic policy than to resolve these an-
cient basic standoffs that have confused and divided us, blocked
understanding, and deadlocked constructive action for genera-
tions? It is an achievement on a par with resolving Evolution and
Creation, except George's program is something we can do
something about. We can use and implement it as quickly as we
are willing to unclog the cerebral arteries and follow through with
action.
  Many people, it is true, are morbidly fascinated by deadlocks
and standoffs and cling to them as old friends and comforters.
They actually prefer irreconcilable disputes as cherished parlor
76                       The Path to Justice

games. It may ease the conscience to think justice must be sacri-
ficed for efficiency, and schools starved and libraries closed to free
up incentives, so nothing really can ever be done.
  We all feel compassion by nature, but to survive and stay whole
in this world of beggars and bandits, we learn to harden our hearts
and cork it in. We learn to screen out evidence of suffering and
injustice and rationalize what we cannot deny. This mindset, while
understandable, is unaffordable in a period of dangerous national
decline and growing division between haves and have-nots.
Corking in feelings is hard on a person, too. There is relief and
satisfaction in venting compassion via support of constructive
public policies.

            The Double Effect: Permits Untaxing of Building
The counterpart of sharing rent through taxation is to untax things
people do and make, like buildings. This doubles the incentive
effect. If the land tax is the stick, untaxing buildings is the corre-
sponding carrot, and George's program is to make both of them
larger.
   Every lot with an old building is pressed between that building,
the "Defender," and a potential replacement, the "Challenger." The
trouble with taxing buildings is that it stacks the fight; it rigs the
score against the Challenger. Say the lot-cum-Defender is worth
$ 100K and the Challenger would cost $500K to build. Challenger
cash flow must exceed Defender cash flow by enough to pay off
the $500Kplus added taxes based on it. If the tax rate is high, that
will stifle new investment as thoroughly as a communist coup.
   The Georgist tax by contrast is impartial between Defender and
Challenger, and lets the market decide. In Milwaukee in 1965, after
a long detailed study, I found switching to the George program
would let 30 percent of the city be renewed forthwith, simply by
untaxing Challengers vis-à-vis Defenders. (The sad news is the
mayor went the other way, so Milwaukee has lost 20 percent of its
people and more of its wealth and is a sick city today.)
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                 77

               The Trzple Effect: Enhances Flow of Credit

Most buildings when new have to surmount a liquidity crisis. Al-
most every one is built on credit with a small equity and takes a
while to yield cash. During this critical period, builders need all
the help they can get.
  The property tax on buildings is a maximum during this crisis.
The timing is such as to maximize the damage for any given tax
yield over time. Now, of course, a building uses public services
and something must be taxed to pay, but new buildings in older
cities nearly always pay for more than they receive, while old ones
receive more than they pay for. Think of building taxes as a kind
of forced loan from the builder to the treasury, to be recovered
down the line when buildings are older. But what could be more
counterproductive than forcing a loan from a person passing
through a credit crisis already?
  The Georgist tax works the other way. It spares the builder
when he needs it, and rises slowly under him over time as the site
ripens to its next best use.

          The Quadruple Effect: Produces Regional Spillovers
Urban blight is cumulative and self-reinforcing; blighted buildings
cast a pall on land around them, discourage upkeep, and stifle re-
newal. Whatever slows renewal of one site therefore slows the
neighborhood, which reflects back blight to the first—a vicious
downward spiral.
  Conversely, new buildings help stimulate renewal around them.
There are exceptions, I know. Some new buildings, especially
banks and corporate headquarters, sterilize a block with blank
walls. I will not defend that, but the exception is not the rule; the
abuse is not the precept. The rule is new buildings draw tenants
from old ones and weaken other Defenders, so other owners have
to renew, too. When they do, where better but next to the newest,
hottest building? So renewal is cumulative, just like blight, only
upwards in a benign spiral.
  This competition for sites raises the tax base—not from build-
ings but from land prices derived from ground rents. Using the
78                       The Path to Justice

higher base, the city can improve public services, if needed, but
without taxing any building, without scaring away any generators
of fiscal surpluses. In this scenario, buildings raise the tax base in-
directly by raising the value of land around them.

                         The Quintuple Effect:
                 Reunites Ownership and Occupancy
Riverside, California built itself a lovely downtown pedestrian
mall, back when that was in vogue, and has been sorry ever since.
Nothing worked out, retailers deserted, and half the stores are
empty. Recently I asked the developer of Tyler Mall, a success,
why he thought downtown failed. I got the answer in two words:
"absentee ownership." I should have known; I've preached it for
years.
  An agricultural adviser in Fresno once told an impressionable
boy, "The best dressing for soil is the owner's shadow, applied
daily." In town they say, "Who's keeping the store?" Absentees
aren't the only negligent owners, nor are they all bad. Torpid
owners are the problem, and they come in many forms. Basically
to make a city go, you want to be rid of owners who see real estate
mainly as a cash cow for their retirement and replace them with
owners who see it as a vehicle for their enterprise, who apply their
shadows daily. Those shadows will also follow them into local
civic clubs and enterprising downtown and neighborhood asso-
ciations for making joint improvements.
  This is a surprisingly delicate area. Walter Goldschmidt was per-
secuted and maligned for his classic Small Business and the
Community, 1946 (republished in his As You Sow, 1947). His
sponsor, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, fared even worse;
it was terminated with extreme prejudice. But he documents the
points abundantly by contrasting Arvin, Dinuba and Wasco, Cali-
fornia.
  It is the surplus in land use that attracts outside buyers. Absen-
tees are redundant parties in production, but often top bidders for
pure ownership; that is the legal privilege of receiving ground
rents plus unearned increments that accrue over time. Georgist
taxation spares the rewards of enterprise and cuts most directly
               Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                79

into those "runs of free income" (as Veblen called them in Absen-
tee Ownershzp), which attract absentee owners. For that reason, it
slowly makes the market transfer ownership from absentees to
occupants and managers on the spot, with all the good commu-
nity effects that must follow. In a period of rising concern over
alien takeovers of U.S. real estate, these points merit focused at-
tention.

           The Sextuple Effect: Increases Capital Formation
Untaxing buildings obviously draws in outside capital, which is
good but is not capital formation to the whole economy. In
Keynesian models, however, reducing taxes on new capital raises
the rate of return after taxes ("marginal efficiency of capital") and
does create new capital. In supply side models, it is more impor-
tant to increase saving. Land taxation helps here, too.
  Land taxation, if vigorously applied, tends to reduce the invest-
ment value of land through a process called "tax capitalization."
There is a diminishing marginal utility of savings to any wealth
holder, meaning the more you have, the less you need more. With
land devalued, those needing wealth seek substitute assets to re-
place land in their portfolios. To acquire those additional assets,
they must save more and invest the savings in real new capital,
rather than land.

              The Septuple Effect: Greater Economy and
                  Less Corruption in Government
Georgist taxation tends to reduce the need for public spending in
at least two obvious ways. One is to increase job opportunities,
which in turn reduces welfare spending. The other is to obviate
much of urban sprawl with its costly, wasteful cross-subsidies.
  In the longer run, it seems reasonable to expect that more
genuine productive job opportunities at home would reduce the
pressures for military spending, at least those portions which are
strictly boondoggling of a make-jobs nature.
  There are city councils and councilpersons who can botch up
and corrupt the best system ever blueprinted. But the Georgist
program may even help straighten them out. Lincoln Steffens
80                      The Path to Justice

taught us that the troublemaker in Eden was not Eve, nor even the
serpent, but... the apple! The apples of discord that corrupt city
councils are unearned increments to land value, which they create
or deny with every decision about extending sewers or changing
zoning. Georgist taxation dehydrates those apples by attaching
higher tax liabilities to each unearned increment.

           Does Renewal Destroy Housing for the Poor?
SOME PEOPLE, RECOGNIZING that George's idea of taxing land values
will be effective, fear that it will be too effective. They are re-
minded of earlier programs of urban revitalization that made vic-
tims of those they were supposed to help.
  'Slum clearance" in the 1950s had a negative cast, with a name
catered solely for middle class consumption. Reuse of cleared land
was often at lower density, inevitably throwing an increment of
unhoused people on the private market. Federal "Urban Renewal"
in the 1960s was better named, but the actual emphasis was all on
clearing, not rebuilding. The inventory of cleared, unrebuilt land
under the Federal program grew vaster each year. "Bombing Out"
and "Negro Removal," the cynics' cracks, were on the mark, al-
though blacks were not by any means the only evictees. Any talk
now of demolition and renewal evokes the specters of those
tragic, cruel, wasteful public programs.
   But George's program begins with fostering renewal and inten-
sive use. Clearance is involved only as needed to serve renewal,
never a goal in itself. The first land taken would generally be va-
cant or unused, such as boarded-up buildings. New buildings
would draw renters and buyers from old ones, releasing more
space. The idea and the impact are to increase supply of rentable
and salable floor space. There would also be more stores with
more competition in selling, and more employers with more
competition in hiring.
  How do we know there would be an aggregate increase of sup-
ply? Higher density is one test. Untaxing buildings fosters higher
density, because density, exemplified by high buildings, is the
substitution of capital for land. Untaxing capital obviously makes
that more economical.
                Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                  81

  Higher quality is the other test. The richer the new tenants or
buyers, the more space they release elsewhere when they move to
new quarters. Now this is the hardest point to see and accept, if
you are poor or an advocate for the poor. There will always be
specific cases where the rich bump the poor. There is a certain
mindset that locks onto such specific cases and makes up con-
temptuous names like "trickle down" to dismiss effects on the ag-
gregate market. But the aggregate is what should concern us. If we
mobilize local tenants to fight new building, we are marshaling a
minority with a particular vested interest to fight against the inter-
ests of the majority of the poor, and everyone. We will spend our
lives straining at gnats and swallowing camels. For the plain fact is
that building new homes for the rich, the ones who can afford
new homes, is what releases useable space for everyone else.
  There are three kinds of slums. Only one kind, the narrowest of
the three, is likely to witness evictions for the rich. This is the slum
on high-valued land. These slums develop in the van of expanding
commerce or high rise apartments, where landowners neglect
their buildings because they expect to demolish them soon. These
areas are limited. The second kind is on bad land, which will stay
bad.
  The third and most common is on good land covered with old
buildings, which have filtered down to people who generate bad
neighborhood effects. Many of these units go vacant. The land
value is low. The market will never renew these slums at one
stroke, but by nibbling at their fringes. But as it nibbles incremen-
tally in, if it does, it unavoidably creates more space than it con-
sumes, raising the aggregate supply.
   Another fear for the poor is gentrification. But this, by definition,
is where new gentry displace the poor without renewal, occupy-
ing the same old buildings. This is one result of not renewing; re-
newal as such is innocent. It seems a bit carping to criticize people
for maintaining and restoring old buildings. The alternative may
be viewed in many ungentrified neighborhoods where buildings
simply go out of use, sheltering no one.
   An example of what happens when renewal does not occur is
Camden, New Jersey, which has the highest tax rate in the state.
It's a depressant now and a vicious circle as the high rate drives
82                         The Path to Justice

away capital and further erodes the depleted tax base. But what if
the tax were on just land value? The depressant would become a
stimulant, the drag a motor, by the simple magic of converting a
variable charge into a fixed, unavoidable one. So it is with most
other cities in need of renewal, which today look vainly to Wash-
ington for salvation and redemption. They do need enabling leg-
islation from their states, on the Pennsylvania model, but given
that, they can save themselves. They'd better; no one else is going
to do it for them.
  But the ultimate end of Georgist policy is to be viewed in terms
of the nation, not just single cities. The idea is to pit cities against
each other to attract people. Nothing is better for people than to
be competed for. It raises their bargaining power as tenants, buy-
ers, and workers.

                    A Summary of Reconciliations
GEORGIST POLICY HAS been shown as a means to revive dying cities,
and in the process to reconcile equity and efficiency, to reconcile
supply side economics with taxation, and to reconcile capital for-
mation with taxation of the rich. It can be seen as a means of har-
monizing collectivism and individualism, in the most constructive
possible ways. I know of no other program whose proponents
even make such claims, let alone substantiate them. As you issue
forth with cap and gown into a world that has already priced you
out of the real estate market, you will find George's program
worth your intense study and strong support.
                                 Notes
   1. Editor's note: This figure comes from 1988, before the Japanese
economy—and its land values—plummeted.
   2. See also Schwab (1998).
  3. A primary concern expressed by environmentalists about land value
taxation is that it will cause "overdevelopment," particularly by forcing
farmers to sell to developers at the urban fringe. The opposite is the case.
The tax encourages more intensive development of the sites with greatest
value, leaving sites of lesser value (those at the urban fringe) undisturbed.
Nevertheless, if citizens are not persuaded that this principle will be ef-
fective in stemming sprawl, it is possible to draw an urban growth
                 Gaffney on the Role of Ground Rent                    83

boundary, and apply the land tax more heavily inside it than outside. In a
perfect market, with perfect planning of public works, this might not be
necessary; but in this imperfect world it may be the best device to recover
from the present aggravated condition of urban sprawl.
