                              Chapter X
     CONTAINMENT POLICIES FOR URBAN SPRAWL
                   MASON GAFFNEY, University of Missouri

  Why should we want to contain cities? Some agriculturalists regard
the answer as too obvious to require demonstration: cities are danger-
ously seductive, sterile and wicked, and, like the Soviets, belong behind
a Curzon Line and cordon sanitaire. The Soil Conservation Service
entertains the Malthusians with endless excursions and alarums over
dangerous inroads on our best cropland, and agricultural extension men
rarely gather without deploring the loss of their territory to an alien
power.
  I quite agree with the soils fundamentalists that the loss of good
cropland is often a needless waste, although I would stress much more
than they the high location value of the soils invaded by our sprawling
cities, and much less than they the alleged absolute world scarcity of
good soil as such. The loss of soil as such is a minor part of the damage
from urban sprawl, because of the nigh-infinite scope for intensification
of use of our vast and carelessly husbanded soils remote from cities.
Our economy has demonstrated a remarkable weakness for generating
excess capacity in most industries, and agriculture above all.
  We run no danger of running out of cropland. Consider the most
extreme case, the destruction of southern California's Valencia citrus
industry by the insatiable subdividers of Los Angeles. It is tragic, it is
largely unnecessary, yet there remain in California, in the southern San
Joaquin Valley alone, something like one million acres with thermal con-
ditions suitable for citrus, according to a recent report from the Riverside
Citrus Experiment Station. The Central Valley Project, the Feather
River Project, the San Luis Project, and a rash of Engineer Corps dams
on San Joaquin Valley streams are bringing water to this land. Mean-
while, Florida has run off with the lion's share of the nation's citrus
industry, easily filling the shortage left by Los Angeles. Italy and Israel
are beginning to wonder where they will ever market the surpluses from
all their new acreage which is soon to bear. The problem is going to be
to find markets for the produce of all the new groves now coming into
bearing—groves planted closer, with better stock, and managed more
knowledgeably than the declining old Los Angeles groves they are re-

                                   (115)
116                UNIvsrrY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
placing. If citrus costs more it will be because urban sprawl has put
more distance between producer and consumer, and producer and pack-
ing house, and not because it has pre-empted a few thousand acres of
irreplaceable soil.
   A parallel case can be made regarding the deciduous fruit industry
of Santa Clara County being destroyed by San Francisco sprawl. The
prunes and apricots are simply moving out to the wider horizons of the
Central Valley, where there is wide scope for intensification.
   The problem which urban sprawl imposes on agriculture is therefore
of another sort from that which exercises the Malthusians. Horticul-
turalists fleeing the city bring a new high standard of intensity to the
areas where they alight, and a higher standard of land values which
tends to drive less intensive agriculture before them, just as they have
been driven. And, as with the city, the problem is exacerbated by
sprawl, for we can see a sort of citrus sprawl and apricot sprawl in the
scattered and capricious development of new areas. Citrus drives out
deciduous, deciduous drives out vines, vines drive out cotton and alfalfa,
these drive out barley, and so on clear to the bottom of the pecking
order. Thus urban sprawl sends out shock waves into the countryside
which travel through the entire hierarchy of land uses. The long-term
result of this is development of excess capacity in agriculture.
  I think it is fair to say there is not an acre between San Francisco and
Los Angeles whose price has not been inflated by urban sprawl. When
a suburban farmer sells out, the law lets him defer his capital gains tax
indefinitely if he buys another farm within one year. That has sent
hundreds of buyers with more money than brains, as one real estate man
put it, swarming over the countryside seeking someone willing to sell
immediately. It bids up prices so that no one without a special tax situ-
ation can afford to buy land unless he is willing to pay for it out of his
hide, so to speak, or is willing to gamble on putting it to a more intensive
use than most people have heretofore considered economic. Again, the
result is a tendency toward premature intensification of many lands, in
a scattered pattern that tends to develop excess capacity.
   So I agree with the Malthusians that we should contain urban sprawl
partly for the sake of agriculture, although I disagree with them over
the nature of the damage being done.
  I. Containment for the City's Sake: I must also demur the Malthu-
sians' emphasis on the paramount importance of farm soils. Damage to
agriculture is severe and consequential, but cities are more important.
Not only do most of our people live there, but something like 80 percent
              APPROACHES TO THE Snjn OF URBANiZATION                   117

of the country's land values are found in the city—a fact so contrary to
the prevailing folklore that it bears endless repetition. It is the problems
of the city that command first attention. Even as resource economists
and conservationists our first concern should be for the resource called
urban land, whose market value betrays the secret—so well hidden be-
neath the conventional rhetoric—that our most valuable natural resource
is the tiny fraction of land surface best fitted by location to bring men
together for co-operation, exchange,, and fraternization.
   Containment and Artificial Scarcity. When I say we should contain
cities for "their own sake" I do not mean for their invidious advantage
over farmers which might be gained by maintaining an artificial scarcity
of urban land. When planners have' spoken of "maintaining urban val-
ues," I am afraid they have not usually distinguished carefully between
two fundamentally different means to that end: upgrading quality and
efficiency is one; limiting the total supply is the other. The former is in
the general interest, urban and rural, landlord and tenant, employer and
worker. The latter is for the partial advantage of urban landowners
against other groups, a radically different concept.' I suspect the general
blurring of distinction between the two ideas is not entirely accidental,
as it is' so much more socially acceptable to approach the latter end by
preaching 'the former. Let me begin then by signalizing the distinction
and repudiating artificial scarcity. Urban containment is desirable to
enhance the quality and efficiency of urban living, but not to redistribute
values to the advantage of urban landowners.
   Containment for Urban Efficiency. We should contain cities in order
to enhance their own efficiency. When I say "efficiency" I do not have
in mind the cold-blooded narrow concept of frightful mechanistic de-
humanization that is employed by a few economists, and often wrongly
imputed to all economists. A thing is only "efficient" in terms of some
definition of output, and most economists define output ultimately in
terms of human satisfactions—warm, palpitating, social, irrational, tradi-
tional, exasperating, faddy, flighty, Freudian, Veblenesque, unnecessary
human satisfactions. The economist's initial concession and postulate of
consumer sovereignty is calculated to disarm all those who tax him with
excessive rationality—and would, if they troubled to learn about it.
Efficiency to this economist means maximizing net human satisfactions
(as humans are pleased to reveal them), with the resources at our dis-
posal.
  An "efficient" city is one that maximizes ease of contact among indi-
viduals, giving people, in their character of both consumer and producer,
118               UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

the widest choice among alternative contacts with the least difficulty.
Efficiency entails sharing the cost of common facilities. In the econo-
mists' Choctaw, that is expressed as exploiting the economies of scale in
decreasing-cost operations (that is, operations whose unit costs fall as
the patronage rises).
  It is here, I think, that some of us have been remiss in failing to empha-
size that decreasing cost operations achieve their economies of scale not
just by finding new customers, but by finding them within a given per-
imeter. Scale of operation and density of service area are not exactly
the same. They may appear equivalent, to be sure, but what appears
equivalent is not always so.
  Here we have a case where two concepts are customarily treated as
though they were equivalent and congruent, when they are merely over-
lapping. The result is loss in the power and accuracy of analysis. Let
us distinguish economies of scale, such as arise from having a larger
water works plant, from economies of density, which result from close
congregation of customers. Compactness of population does permit
economies of scale by increasing the number of customers within eco-
nomic reach of one load center. But it is obviously incidental to the
basic saving in distribution. With many utilities, distribution, costs more
than production, and distribution savings themselves are the paramount
consideration.
  Consider water distribution. If demand doubles within a fixed service
area by doubling density, we need simply expand all pipe diameters—
and not by double, but by the square root of two, since cross-sections
increase with the square of the radius. But if demand doubles by dou-
bling the service area, at constant density, we must, (a) double our pipe
mileage; (b) double the cross section of our old system at its base, and
more than double it elsewhere, to transmit the extra load through to the
new extension; (c) increase pressure at the system load center to main-
 tain it at the fringes (especially if the new lands are higher); and (d)
upgrade our pipe-joints to hold the extra pressure.
   Actually those four simplest considerations understate the case a good
deal. We should add the factor of peaking. The fewer customers on a
 given line, the higher is the usual ratio of peak demand to mean daily
demand because there is less pooling of offsetting demand patterns, and
more lawn sprinkling. There is also a factor of planning expansion.
"Containing urban sprawl" does not imply halting growth, but holding
it inside compact increments, whose ultimate density is known in advance
and will be reached quickly, saving utilities from the waste of under- or
              APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF URBANIZATION                   119

oversizing their lines in the face of uncertainty. Urban sprawl as known
today not only reduces density but breeds extreme uncertainty of future
density.
  What about autos? Auto traffic seems to have reached the density
that produces congestion, and congestion is the basic cause of increasing
costs. The case for higher density is not quite so immediately obvious
with automobiles as with water pipes, but I think equally strong. It is
a specious analysis indeed which would impute traffic congestion to high
residential densities. For one thing, the more distance lies between A
and B, the more miles must be covered to achieve a given level of link-
age. Sprawl requires more road mileage for a given population, but the
need to use it increases in proportion with the mileage, with no reduction
in congestion per mile. Road funds that might be used to widen streets,
bridge strategically, and overpass heavy intersections, are diverted to
lengthening streets. Public transit, which is a decreasing cost operation,
fades away, forcing ever greater dependence on private cars. Urban
sprawl is not a flight from traffic congestion but the primary source of it.
   Containment to Help Cities Grow Larger It may sound paradoxical,
but a basic reason for containing urban sprawl is to let cities grow larger.
I do not mean wider or vaster, but more populous and more wealthy.
   Cities exist to bring people together. The city is an organism, a dis-
tributive organism spread over some space. That which makes it an
organic city, rather than a mob of lower animals competing for light and
air, is the set of circulatory systems that tie the pieces together. These
distributive networks must overcome space, essentially, and the more
space there is between pieces, the harder their job becomes. If popu-
lation can be kept compact, however, and if the corpuscles can be kept
flowing easily through the circulatory system, there is no limit within
human experience to the advantages of urban size. The variety, the
specialization, the drama and excitement, the access to alternatives, the
pooling of risks and sharing of common costs, the exchange of informa-
tion, and other such advantages that can be achieved as a central meet-
ing and market place grows, know no limits.
   Cities do meet limits, however, when it becomes so far from one side
to the other that the city loses nucleation and begins, like the lowly
amoeba, to reproduce by primitive fission. The amoeba's extremities are
called pseudopods, false-feet, because they are only amorphous blobs of
protoplasm and not specialized members integrated as parts of a co-
ordinated higher organism. So it is with the extremities of our sprawling
cities, too remote from the center to relate strongly to it and share corn-
120                UNiVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

mon costs with the other extremities. It is over 100 miles across what
passes for the city of Los Angeles, and that is the model toward which
all are drifting.
  It is becoming prohibitively expensive to tie our cities together. The
New York Regional Planning Association recently estimated a cost of
$50 billion to reconnect what used to be the coherent, articulated city
of New York. Los Angeles has kept open the automotive arteries to
downtown, but when you get there, where are you? The automobile
pre-empts two-thirds of the central business district, and fouls 100 per-
cent of the atmosphere.
  Reverting to the idiom of my profession, we may sum this up neatly
by saying that cities are at once in the stage of increasing returns to scale,
but negative returns to more space. The city itself would be better off
to disgorge much of the undigested outlying land it has gulped, even if
it had no alternative use in agriculture. And of course an important
bonus then would be that farming, mining, outdoor recreation, and other
land-using activities, could be closer to and integrated with the cities.
   Containment for Urban Flexibility. Containment is desirable to make
cities more flexible. They are now becoming poorly co-ordinated spas-
tics. The word "sprawl" is well chosen—the arms and fingers are so
overextended that the co-ordinating mechanism can hardly control them.
The fixed cost of the social overhead capital is becoming so high, per
capita, that we cannOt afford to replace obsolete public equipment fre-
quently.
  'What we need in this dynamic world are cities that are light on their
feet, so to speak; cities that can readily face in new directions, adapt to
new needs, just as we expect our industries to retool quickly in the face
of new exigencies.
  Let us look at the private sector. Sprawl tends to paralyze that, too.
One point on which there is little argument is that the renewal frequency
of private sites is too slow in our cities—acceleration of renewal has be-
come recognized as a primary object of public policy in our times. Now
what does it take to induce a landowner to demolish an obsolete building
 and replace it with a good new one? I think I have part of the answer
to that question. A year or two ago, along Park Avenue, I noticed them
wrecking a sound old thirty-story building. Why? To salvage the site
for reuse under a new forty-story building. If the old building had been
in St. Louis I am sure it would still be standing, and in Aberdeen, S. D.,
it would stand until the end of time. We do not wreck old buildings
ordinarily to salvage the plumbing or the mortar, and we rarely break
              APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF URBANIZATION                    121

even on old stones or brick. We wreck buildings to salvage their sites
for reuse. And that is only worthwhile if the site has a high reuse value
which makes it expensive for the landowner to keep it hidden under an
old building.
  There are two little patches of Manhattan Island that are among our
most flexible and adaptable urban resources. These are the two high
rent areas of which the English visitor remarked, "It will be a beautiful
city if they ever finish it." The real beauty of Manhattan is precisely
that it is not finished, but constantly alive, evolving, meeting the needs
of the times. A city is only finished when it is "finished"—dead, that is.
  But when we let, encourage, and subsidize our cities to sprawl out all
over the surrounding countryside, we release much of the pressure that
would maintain central rents and land values, and we greatly defer the
time when it is economical for central landowners to clear and renew
their lands. Cheap land means slow renewal frequency of sites.
  I have long admired Tawney's dictum that a society is rich when ma-
terial things are cheap, and human beings dear, and long sympathized
with Turner's view of the importance of cheap land to American political
and economic development. But cheap land let the pioneers sweep over
the west like a swarm of locusts, and just so it is letting our cities migrate
continually outwards, leaving in their old centers, not just, the desolation
of the locust, but obsolescence and arrestment of development.
  Such flexibility as we achieve under the present dispensation is
achieved by migration rather than renewal. But that means extended
lines of communication and supply and a needlessly heavy commitment
of the nation's capital resources to transportation and utility distributive
networks serving populations too sparse to permit very frequent renewal
of the networks themselves, and at a level of land rents and values too
low to force very frequent renewal of the private lands.
   No principle of city and regional planning is valid, I submit, that does
not anticipate change and adaptation to it. To that end we need high
land rents and values to spark private renewal, and many customers per
mile of transportation and distributive network to justify frequent adjust-
ment to modem requirements. To that end we need to contain urban
sprawl.
  Lest I be misunderstood, let me anticipate my policy statement and
note that we can keep down the selling price of land titles, and still keep
up the yearly cost of holding land, by levying heavy taxes on the base
of site value. Thus land is made cheap to buy, but dear to hold, an op-
timal arrangement in my opinion. But of that, more later.
122               UNWEESITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

   A new idea, so it is said, goes through three stages. In stage one, it
is too ridiculous even to consider; in stage two, it threatens the founda-
tions of the Republic; and in stage three, why, everyone has always
known it. The deploring of urban sprawl has arrived at stage three, I
think, with startling and gratifying suddenness. Not five years ago, the
spirit of Richard T. Ely was still abroad in the land, with his artful Polly-
anna-ism about "ripening costs" which had helped so many find order
and economy in the urban sprawl of the 1920's. Today, we have had so
many Jeremiads against sprawl—I'm guilty of producing one or two
myself—that we can proceed directly to stage four: what might be done
about the problem.
   II. Negative Containment: Aspects of the "Truman Doctrine." Or-
ganized society's reflexive reaction to most newly recognized problems
is usually in the negative: "Thou Shalt Not!" So it was in the 1930's
that those benighted planners and political scientists who had never
swayed to the higher economic rhythms revealed in Ely's doctrine of
ripening costs (and saw something amiss in facts such as enough lots
subdivided in Florida to house the entire population of the United
States), looked around for ways to say "No!" The policies they espoused
constituted a sort of Truman Doctrine applied to cities.
  Subdivision Control. In the negative spirit of the Doctrine, it was the
active agent of sprawl—the leapfrogging subdivider and the errant
builder—rather than the holdouts over whom they leaped and among
whom erred, who bore the brunt of wrath. "Block that subdivider" be-
came the keynote; "they shall not pass Verdun." Viewing the carnage
of the 1920's from the perspective of the 1940's, planners told us we
should refuse to accept new subdivisions except where they were planned
for; refuse to extend utilities to unauthorized developments; and so on.
Cities should get extraterritorial jurisdiction to abort unplanned building;
counties should zone; suburbs should zone for low density; subdividers
should bear more of their street improvement costs; etc. The ideal of
ideals held forth was the "Greenbelt," a complete desert undefiled by
vile man. By 1940, everyone with any pretense to literacy and keeping
au courant knew that the explosive population projections had been
wrong, that stagnation and maturity had set in, and that the true course
of future population was steady or declining, so that willful subdividers
and builders would only ruin themselves, as well as the greenbelts, if
left to their own devices.
  Low-density Zoning. It is hard to muster votes in a greenbelt devoid
of human habitation, and so that scheme has not burgeoned. But the
              APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF URBANIZATION                   123

denizens of lands under low-density zoning have been able to compen-
sate in resources and enthusiasm for their small numbers, and so that
kind of modified negative containment has proved much more viable.
The extreme is the exclusive agricultural zone as advocated currently in
Maryland and California. Landowners in such zones are assessed only
on the agricultural capacity of their lands, in return for which they forego
for some infinite period the option of intensifying and converting to
urban use. Only slightly less extreme and much more common is the
large-lot zoning in force—again, for finite terms only—in many of the
horsier suburbs. Like exclusive agricultural zoning, large-lot zoning has
proved an eminently workable plan wherewith to minimize land carrying
costs while awaiting that intensification which the onrushing tide of
population (which everyone with any pretense to literacy now knows is
the true forecast) makes inevitable. In the meantime, while satisfying
the speculator, low-density zoning pleases the planner who still preaches
negative containment for its own sake.
   All zoning, indeed, partakes of this negative quality. Zoning is never
mandatory, only restraining. It is effective only where it undershoots
the market, never where it overshoots. It seeks to focus activities where
they belong (insofar as that is the objective, and not merely a pretext),
by interdicting them elsewhere. It can only sanction them where they
belong. A sanction is not a mandate, and a zoner is only a nay-sayer.
   Assessment Discrimination. A third kind of negative containment is
the assessment of lands by their use instead of their potential capacity.
The practice is actually illegal, but nonetheless common. The law stipu-
lates market value as the base for ad valorem taxation; the assessor sub-
stitutes a criterion of use and development. This serves again to mini-
mize the carrying costs of speculators and other holdouts and to help
them maintain a species of greenbelt—or weedbelt—around the growing
city. It might be conceived as a form of implicit collusion between the
city fathers—with interests in maintaining the values of central land and
old buildings—and the weedbelt speculators: "you don't compete with
us for awhile yet, nor flood our schools; we don't tax you." Often, in-
deed, these are the very same persons or families.
   There is afoot these days a strong movement to formalize and legalize
this sort of practice by classifying land according to use and ownership
and letting Thona fide" farmers and country clubs continue to enjoy
farm level assessments until they are ready to cash in at urban prices.
I would not take this movement for legal sanction as a sign of strength
of the practice, however, but the opposite. It is the breakdown of the
124               UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

cozy informal arrangements, and the successful demand for reassessment
of suburban weedbelts, that has sparked the drive for legal sanction Nor
would I anticipate much more success in the movement, despite its Mary-
land victory. Any practice that will not bear analysis is bound to do
better under the table than over it.
   "Dead Lands." A fourth kind of negative containment, which was
widely practiced in the 1930's and the 1940's by many important cities
and counties, was the cold storage of tax-delinquent lands. Tax-delin-
quency was the rule in the early 1930's, and tax-reversion very common.
Many cities embraced policies of clearing title and returning the land
to private ownership at velocities varying from viscous to glacial.
  Objections to Negative Containment. There are several legitimate ob-
jections to negative containment policies. Some are of a distributive na-
ture. Containment, which grants high-density to some and denies it to
others, is discriminatory. A favored area selected by the planner for a
new shopping center would become worth some $100,000 an acre, while
land reserved for open space or five-acre lots won't be worth a twentieth
part of that. That may please half the owners, who are not interested in
early resale, but only in low taxes. But the other half will wax full
wroth. When the planning commission and the Zoning board ffit about
sprinkling little golden showers here rather than there, they make million-
aires of some and social reformers of others. How anyone could ever
expect the losers to accept their fate philosophically is something that
occasionally makes me wonder—even though some of my best friends
are planners—if they have any idea what they are doing. The fatuity
of exhorting those whose lands have been reserved for open space to
forego their capital gains out of enthusiasm for the Director of Planning's
vision of the "county beautiful" simply staggers one's credulity. Several
landowners• already have gone to court protesting that low-density zoning
was depriving them of property without due process.
  Low-density zoning also discriminates among buyers. It is widely
observed today that large-lot zoning has proceeded to such extremes that
most suburban land is reserved for a tiny fraction of the buyers, while
most buyers, the lower-middle class mass market, are restricted to a nar-
row choice of sites at high unit prices.
  Economists discovered monopoly, it seems, about thirty years ago, or
resurrected it and went on a marathon kick. Under Chamberlain they
found it in every hitherto innocent jar and tube on our shelves, and
nowadays it is even becoming safe to whisper that labor unions and
organized farmers might warrant the pejorative term. Yet, somehow
             APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF URBANIZATION                  125

amid this universal' imputation of sin, no one has impugned the city
fathers, that community of interest of important urban landowners known
as municipal government, organized as a cartel in broad daylight and
with the force of law at its disposal. No Gary Dinners are needed to
administer this cartel, no clandestine machinations, no secret files con-
cealed from the Federal Trade Commission and the Anti-Trust Division.
The city dads are simply engaged in protecting property values and pro-
moting sound planning, which everyone has always known are good and
desirable things.
  The German Historical School of economic thought was not so obtuse
on this matter. Their observations of the Hanseatic city-states exploiting
their hinterlands afford us great insight into the motivations of city
fathers, and every city planner should study Schmoller on Mercantili.sm
before he goes forth to offer himself as the mercenary of modem munici-
pal mercantilism.
  As the German historians relate, the monopolistic city can exploit its
customers. The city exploits its customers by stunting its own develop-
ment, limiting the number of creaking doors and sagging gates through
which its customers may go for supplies and services.
  There is also exploitation within the city. Employers, merchants, and
assorted rent-collectors are generally happy with policies that keep out
untrained interlopers who might have alien ideas about competing for
labor, tenants, and customers, and in general keeping the natives restful
in their compounds. Negative containment policies have an instinctive
fascination for anyone whose interest is to limit competition.
  There are many groups which would like to limit competition, of
course. But cities tend to fall most strongly under the sway of those who
stand to gain or lose most by municipal decisions, and those whose assets
are irrevocably committed to the city, that is, the landowners. The rest
of the citizens are 'by comparison mere transients, outsiders and climbers
whose organization and influence is seldom commensurate with their num-
bers. To the dominant landowning oligarchy, few limitations on com-
petition commend themselves with quite the same force of logic as
limitations on the entry of new lands into urban use. It is therefore no
accident that negative containment is the most respectable and salable
kind of planning in many quarters. It harmonizes all too mellifluously
with the interest of a dominant class. But from the viewpoint of social
economy, of other interest groups, of the general welfare, of the region,
state, and nation, and even of most urban landowners in their roles as
workers and capitalists, negative containment is an instrument of
monopoly exploitation.
126                UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

  But the most damning fault of negative containment, even from the
monopolistic viewpoint, is that, like the Truman Doctrine for which I
have named it, it does not contain. To illustrate, let me offer the whole
scope of American history.
  Negative containment has been tried at the national as well as the
local level, with what success the present boundaries of the Republic
attest. George III tried it when he proclaimed after 1763, "Thou shalt
not cross the Appelachian crest." He reaped the Revolution, and settlers
poured through the Cumberland Gap into Kentucky and Tennessee.
They would have crossed the Ohio next, but the Federalists assumed the
negative role and tried to make a Greenbelt of the old Northwest Terri-
tory—Merrill Jensen in The New Nation is the best source on this. The
nation showed its gratitude by electing Jefferson, who not only opened
the Northwest, but bought Louisiana and started the Cumberland Road.
Easterners still dragged their feet, and the upshot was state subsidy of
internal improvements, Old Hickory, easy money, distribution of federal
surpluses to the states, and the canal boom. Next, the Southern Demo-
crats assumed the negative, and they reaped Abe Lincoln, California and
Oregon, homesteads, western railroads, landgrant colleges, and the rest.
  There has been an ebb and flow in our westward expansion, a sort
of manic-depressive alternation in the national mood. Expansion has
outdone itself, followed by a bust. "In God we trusted, in Kansas we
busted," is an oft-told tale. During the depressed moods, the Greenbelt
forces have rallied, hoping at last to contain their fellows, but in vain.
Manifest Destiny has always prevailed. You cannot fence in the Ameri-
can people.
  The forces of containment, however, can impose, and have imposed
on settlement, an uneconomic scatter and sprawl. They have held back
the logical areas for continuous settlement and forced the pioneers to
move around and beyond them. If you examine a map of population
density in the United States at any time in history, you will see that
urban scatter and sprawl have their counterparts in national patterns of
land use, and they always have had, in spite of the Indian menace. And
by 1890 the Census gave up trying to draw a "frontier," for "the unsettled
area has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there
can hardly be said to be a frontier line,"—a passage, I think, which
Frederick J. Turner misread as he launched from it into his "Frontier in
American History." It was not the frontier that was passing, but the
last vestige of orderly advance into it.
  Our modern greenbelts and golf courses and exclusive agricultural
zones around cities bear a family resemblance to King George's Proclama-
              APPROACHES TO THE S'runy OF URBANIZATION                   127

tion Line—he, too, was solicitous of preserving a low-density way of life.
But the open land zones do not contain, any more than did the hapless
Hanover's imaginary fence. Builders leapfrog over and beyond them.
And the net result, just as in continental American history, is the opposite
of the fence-builders' intent. Sprawl is worsened as settlement spreads
out farther and faster than it would have of its own accord.
  Shall cities refuse to cooperate with outlying subdividers? They can
always find a hospitable suburb or unincorporated land in the county.
Shall county zoning control them? High-density zoning becomes the
subject of logrolling on the County Board, with overzoning the certain
outcome. Shall city, county, and state conspire to keep tax-reverted
lands forever out of private hands? Other cities, counties, and states,—
yes, and other nations—will adopt opposite policies and attract people
and capital. Negative containment does not contain. It is a repetitive
exercise in futility and self-annulment. It won't work, and we wouldn't
like it if it did.
   III. Neutral Containnwnt: A couple of containment policies, to which,
I think, the wise and honest and economical can repair, may be suggested.
The first of these I call neutral or passive containment, and it amounts to
nothing more startling than desisting from subsidizing expansion. How-
ever, that seemingly innocuous and safely conservative proposal is star-
tling once we begin to contemplate the many ways that we have in-
stitutionalized subsidy to expansion, and the weight of interests vested in
those institutions.
   Subsidies to Sprawl. Somehow we as a people have widely accepted
the notion that every citizen has a right to certain basic transportation
and utility services no matter where he chooses to locate, and on roughly
the same terms as if he lived next to the power substation, the filter plant,
the gas tanks, or other load centers. We seem to believe that squatters
and nesters out in the coves and backwoods have a right to public roads
at whatever cost to other farmers; and farmers generally have a right to
better roads than they would pay for themselves at whatever cost to the
cities.
  Within cities we apply the same general notions. Outlying land-
owners, so long as they lie within the corporate limits, are entitled to
water, sewer, and streets. They may be asked to pay for extensions from
the nearest trunk or main, and they will bluster and act abused. But
consider: They require capacity in the trunks and mains, and in the
street system, from their remote sites clear back to the center of the
system. The true relative costs of service may best be grasped by en-
128               UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PuBLICATIONS

visioning each house connected directly to the water plant with its own
separate one-inch pipe—one-inch and separate all the way. And when
are the outlanders ever asked to pay in that measure? The interior
capacity is generally carried by the interior lands and supplied free to
the outlanders who simply hook on to the end of an established system.
If that system happens to have some short-run excess capacity available
we insouciantly assume that the social cost is nil, even though the long-
run cost has been and will again be very large.
   Within franchise areas we require the same practice of utilities: post-
age-stamp pricing. They make money in the high-density central areas
which are also usually—but not always—near their load centers, and lose
money in the low-density marches and fringe lands. Thus they serve as
an agency for milking the center to feed the borders, thus subsidizing
decentralization. As the price of their franchise they must serve anyone
almost anywhere. Sometimes we let them off when the partial incre-
mental cost of an individual extension from the nearest trunk exceeds
three times the expected revenue, or some such formula. But we require
them to lose money, and they are willing, because they can get it all back
from the centers. We let them raise rates to make their six percent on
investment in any event. Their far flung money-losing networks add to
the base on which they can earn six percent by soaking the high-density
areas, and nail down territories for their future exploitation.
  The political forces ranged behind this decentralist pattern I would
guess include rural domination of our states, and many half-urban coun-
ties, plus a desire by central business district landowners—who are
fortune's favorites by any reckoning, and the winners in the great Ameri-
can game of public works for private profit—to broaden the base of their
political support by sharing some of the loot with the outer landowners.
In the process they also cement a working alliance with the farmers and
turn a few dollars speculating in suburban land, in which they are heavy
plungers. They are aided by the fact that postage-stamp pricing is the
simplest of all formulas to understand and express, and politics is often
dominated by the most formulable solution and slogan. They must
stifle their monopolistic impulses, described earlier, but let us give them
credit for political realism. They sense the limits of power and play the
game to survive—and thrive.
  Economic Graduation of Rates. How would we levy an economic
charge for urban transportation and utility service? Instead of consider-
ing the details of decreasing costs (long-run and short-run), replacement
policy, capitalization of consumer surplus into land values, benefit-cost
               APPROACHES TO THE STuDY OF URBANIZATION                  129

analysis, etc., ad infinitum, let us for the instant case just return to the
vision of each lot connected directly to a central water works with its
own individual one-inch pipe. It is abundantly clear that costs are a
direct function of distance from the center. And water rates should be
graduated accordingly, the central lots paying very low rates and the
outer ones high rates.1
  Now it really doesn't make a great difference in the principle if the one-
inch pipes, as they converge on the center, are bundled together into
fasces, and if these in turn are fused into wide-caliber mains. The outer-
most customer still requires the equivalent of his one-inch pipe in the
mains, clear back to the plant. The major difference between mains and
one-inch pipes is that the latter are costlier per unit of flow-capacity, and
since the outer lands require a larger share of small-caliber piping, their
rates should be graduated upwards more than in proportion to lineal
mileage of connecting pipes.
  But, one may object, the outlander may not be willing to pay so high
a price. That is the idea precisely! When it costs us more to carry water
out to someone than it is worth to him, then we are well advised not to
do it. He will be constrained not to move out into areas of high-cost.
water (and all other utilities), and we will have ceased to subsidize
random lateral expansion, or suburban sprawl. This is the policy of
neutral or passive containment. I commend it most sincerely.
  With respect to streets, the gas tax plays a role analogous to that of
a graduated water rate, and I applaud it. We must also take the next
logical step and plan our street extensions in a neo-Kameralistic sort of
way, building only those extensions that will pay for themselves (in-
cluding their share of inner street capacity), from increased tax revenues.
Our cities, urban counties, and states, now push new streets and high-
ways out into new territory, and upgrade the old section-line or other
rural roads, without much concern for benefit-cost relations. They can
afford to be generous: they tap surpluses from the congested center to
underwrite low-density, deferred-demand, high-risk fringe areas. We
should insist that the margins pay for themselves, if not immediately at
least within a reasonably short time, discounting futurity at high market
rates commensurate with the risks involved. Arid we should remember
that they impose more, than their proportionate burden on central city
streets because of their greater dependence on private cars.
   I do not hold with the proposition that user charges should cover all
road and utility costs. Network extensions also raise land values, and the
municipal Kameralist should certainly raise assessments promptly and

      5—2703
130                UNIVEBSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

count the increase of property taxes (net of decreases caused elsewhere),
as part of his revenues from an extension. We need not fear that such
a policy will cause him to extend unwisely. It will, in fact, wondrously
deflate the demand for extension, and we may end up with a problem of
persuading border landowners to accept the public works for which
many of them now clamor so greedily. That is a problem, however, that
most of us would gladly exchange for the present array.
  Objection to Neutral Containrnent. A system of rates graduated by
mileage from a load center does not offer the virtue of simple formulari-
zation, the more so when there are multiple centers, peak loads, marginal
costs vs. average costs, etc. But we live in an age of growing sophistica-
lion, of computers and systems analysts and moon rockets, and there is
no reason why we must gear our urban structures to the lowest common
denominator of the courthouse bench warmers of -ought-six.
   And, indeed, back in -ought-six there were commuter trains with
tickets rated by the station, and surcharges for pumping water uphill,
and other such obvious applications of graduated rate-making. It is just
that since then we have focused our best talents on the glamorous prob-
lems of places as remote as possible from our own lives and problems
while our neighborhoods fell into disrepair. Now that local taxes are
mounting again to the "squawk level" we can certainly bear up under
the strain of applying a little reason to things nearest and dearest. It
might even serve some educational function.
 Some of the outlanders will object to my proposals, as devaluing their
lands. Others will support me, as saving them from unwelcome pre-
mature invasion by fragments of urban sprawl, and I would pin much
hope on these others to neutralize those some. But let us look for a bit
just at those malcontents.
  The system of postage-stamp pricing effects a species of crude com-
munion among members of the landowning cartel, a sort of rough-and-
ready distributive equity, not among all men, but among the charmed
cfrcle of those who own title to real estate. It tends to make every man's
lot as good as every other. Of course, some members of this communion
are more equal than others, for at $25 a square foot the central business
district land outmeasures the border section at a nickel a foot by several
hundred times. But most of the lands fall in a medium price range
around $.50 to $1.00 a foot these days, and postage-stamp pricing helps
assuage the feelings of the outlanders by compensating for the natural
disadvantages of their peripheral position.
  The feudal antecedents of this approach to distributive equity should
               APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF URBANIZATION                     131

be obvious. It harks back to the French philosophy of property, whereby
the institution is not a means to allocate resources efficiently but to dis-
tribute them equitably. It harks back to an age when all social relations
had to be expressed through land, when every heir had to have his own
little parcel of plow land, pasture land, and courtyard, regardless of the
excess hiking imposed on all parties. It harks back to when there was
no medium of exchange, no organized bureaucracy, no systematic taxa-
tion, no public welfare, no continuity of government, nothing one could
count on for sure but land.
  Today, surely, we can do better. Granted that fortune's favorites in
the central business district should share with the rest of us, can we not
spread the central surpluses around by some means other than wasting
them on extensions that cost more than they are worth? I would like
to suggest a simple means to that end, which I have described as "posi-
tive containment."
  IV. Poritive Containment: The philosophy of positive containment is
to make the central city the most attractive place for people to live and
invest their capital. It is not necessary to put a fence around the city
and make it a prison. The central city is already the best place for most
activities of most people—that is implicit in the high unit values that
land retains there in spite of all the decentralist bias of our institutions; in
spite of the atrophy of central land values brought on by years of under-
development, obsolescence, and degeneration of old buildings there; in
spite of race and school problems; in spite of years of romantic un-
realistic drivel about bucolic serenity and executive ranch houses and
low suburban taxes. In spite of everything, central land still commands
a premium. All that is necessary is to cultivate and develop the great
potential capacity of this abused resource.
  One step to that end is implicit in the neutral containment proposal; to
make all utility rates very low there; and to spend a larger share of gas-
tax revenues and other street funds on the center. Is it not strange that
downtown buildings should be thirty stories high while downtown streets
and walks are only one level plane? Central business district streets are
one of our most underdeveloped resources. At least we could double-
deck them, grade-separate bad corners, and in some areas we might sup-
ply public vertical transportation, just as we do lateral. The condo-
minium, after all, has taught us how to subdivide vertical space, and it
isn't more than a step from that to public elevators.
  None of that helps the problem of distributive equity, however, but
only worsens it. The heart of my proposal for positive containment is
132               UN1VEBSrIY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

therefore another measure, which has the remarkable quality of extract-
ing more tax money from the center and simultaneously helping bring it
to full flower. This measure is a heavy ad valorem tax on the base of
site-capacity.
   We have always heard that heavy taxes stifle enterprise, but that is a
careless generalization. Taxes do not stifle enterprise just because they
are heavy: what matters is how the tax varies when the taxpayer acts
enterprisingly. What I am proposing is a heavy tax that is fixed according
to the capabilities of a site, and does not rise when individual buildings
rise, nor• fail as they age• and obsolesce. A site-capacity tax will move up
or down as environment improves or worsens, but remains frozen as in-
dividual landowner's respond to the environmental challenge. It does
•not tax a landowner as he improves, but as his neighbors and his gov-
ernment improve his opportunities.
   A site-capacity tax will hit the center of town much harder than the
outlands, because that is where the land values are, and where the ratio
of land value to building value is highest.
   Such a tax is not only permissive of site-improvement, it is down-
right mandatory. We see this effect in outlying areas all the time, where
farmers complain that rising property taxes force them to intensify and
convert land to urban use. That is what exclusive agricultural zoning is
all about, is it not? What I am proposing is to apply this potent positive
leverage of taxation where it belongs—in the core of the central city—to
the end of accelerating its renewal and overall revival. Let central build-
ings match the mountain majestyof central land values, and leave the
agricultural zones in their Arcadian tranquility.
   At present, by taxing buildings we are taxing vertical transportation.
Think how many miles of wires, ducts, pipes and conduits there are in a
skyscraper, not to mention the stairs and elevators; all social overhead
capital supplied at private expense, and taxed besides. If the same floor
space were sprawled out laterally over a section of suburban prairie, the
connecting wires et a!. would not only be much longer, but supplied at
public expense, and/or heavily subsidized. We tax vertical transportation
and subsidize horizontal. With such a large and systematic fiscal bias
at work, is it surprising we get urban sprawl? When I hear economists
and others attribute sprawl to consumer tastes, and workings of the in-
visible hand, I am moved to paraphrase Omar the Tentmaker:
   0, Thou, who didst with windfall and with waste
   Beset the streets where buildings may be placed
   Thou wilt not with predestined choice propel
  Me outwards, then impute my sprawl to "Taste"!
                  APPROACHES TO THE Snm OF UBBANIZATION                                       133

  A three percent annual property tax on a new building, if converted to
a lump sum payable now, is roughly equivalent to a 50 percent excise
tax on new construction. If what is called the "land" assessment is
raised, too, when the building rises—and that is often the éktra-legal
practice—the true rate on the building is even higher. When, at the
same time, we are extending gas lines to anyone whose probable demand
is great enough to pay for one-third of the cost of the last few rods of
piping, and charging the cost to apartment dwellers who pay in rent for
their last feet of pipe, it is not consumer sovereignty that determines loca-
tion, but political sovereignty. The fiscal cards are stacked, and the out-
come is predestined.
  The reforms I have sketched out here would give us a straight deck,
and the consumers' will could have full sway. I believe that the un-
biased consumer would end the worst abuses of urban sprawl. At the
same time, the needs of distributive equity would be served.
  I do not hold forth a world without problems, for the application of
these economic proposals entails much detailed work. At least the blood,
sweat, and tears would not be in vain. As an economist I would not
quail from the analytical problems. But the economist proposes, the
political scientist disposes. The disposal of my proposal "out in the
brawl" may seem inauspicious. But I have enough faith in human nature
to think it might at least get a hearing on its merits in this age of higher
education.
                                        FOOTNOTES
   1. The structure of these rates, as between a fixed and a variable component, is a question too
lengthy to pursue here: see Mason Gaffney, "Land and Rent in Welfare Economics," in Clawson,
Harris, and Ackerman (ads.), Land Economics Research, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1962; for
another treatment of the subject see Warren Hall, "A Method for Allocating Costs of a Water Sup-
ply Canal," Jotsrnat of Farm Economics, November 1963, pp. 713-720, and works cited therein.
