MODERNIZING
URBAN LAND
POLICY
Papers presented at an RFF Forum held
in Washington D.C., 13—14 April 1972


EDITED BY MARION CLAWSON




Published for Resources for the Future Inc.
By The Johns Hopkins Univ ers ity Press, Baltimore and London


                           MISSOURI STATE LIBRARY
                          JEFFERSON CITY, MISSOURi
RESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE, INC.
1755 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036

Board of Directors:
Erwin D. Canham, Chairman, Robert 0. Anderson, Harrison Brown, Edward
J. Cleary, Joseph L. Fisher, Luther H. Foster, F. Kenneth Hare, Charles 1.
Hitch, Charles F. Luce, Frank Pace, Jr., Emanuel R. Piore, Stanley H.
Ruttenberg, Lauren K. Soth, Maurice F. Strong, Mrs. Robert J. Stuart, P. F.
Watzek, Gilbert F. White.
Honorary Dire ctors. Horace M. Aibright, Reuben G. Gustavson, Hugh L.
Keenleyside, Edward S. Mason, William S. Paley, Laurance S. Rockefeller,
John W. Vanderwilt.

President: Joseph L. Fisher
Secretary- Treasurer: John E. Herbert

Resources for the Future is a nonprofit corporation for research and edu-
cation in the development, conservation, and use of natural resources and the
improvement of the quality of the environment. It was established in 1952
with the cooperation of the Ford Foundation. Part of the work of Resources
for the Future is carried out by its resident staff; part is supported by grants
to universities and other nonprofit organizations. Unless otherwise stated,
interpretations and conclusions in RFF publications are those of the authors;
the organization takes responsibility for the selection of significant subjects
for study, the competence of the researchers, and their freedom of inquiry.

RFF editors: Mark Reinsberg, Vera W. Dodds, Nora E. Roots.




Copyright 1973 by The Johns Hopkins University Press
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America

The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland 21218
The Johns Hopkins University Press, Ltd., London
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 72—12365
ISBN O—8018—1491—X
TAX REFORM
TO RELEASE LAND


                                                      MASON GAFFNEY




   Taxes on land and buildings are important influences on land use, and are
within the control of government. Real estate taxes are a major source of
revenue to local governments (LGs) in the United States, as well as being a
major cost of owning property. Currently under legal attack in the United
States is the local real estate tax as the backbone of public school finance.
The premise is that children should not be deprived of reasonable education
because their school district lacks an adequate tax base. Regardless of any
reforms in this system of local taxing for local services, it seems probable that
real estate taxes will persist at some level of government — they are too
important a source of revenue to be abandoned. They might or might not be
reduced.
   Real estate taxes do more than raise revenue; they influence land use,
often strongly. Their influence arises not merely from their level, but from
the relative tax on land versus that on buildings, from the relative tax on
unimproved land versus that on improved land, from the frequency and
reasons for reassessment of property, and from other aspects of the imposi-
tion of such taxes. Some of the land use effects may be unintended by the
legislators and administrators responsible for the taxes, but many of the
effects seem clearly to be desired and sought. Real estate taxes cannot abso-
lutely compel some land uses nor absolutely forbid others, as can zoning or
building codes; but they provide powerful economic incentives, which are


M A S 0 N G A F F N E Y is a research associate at Resources for the
Future and was formerly professor of economics at the University of Wiscon-
sin, Milwaukee. He has also taught at the universities of Missouri and Oregon
and at North Carolina State College and is the author of numerous mono-
graphs and articles on urban expansion, containment of urban sprawl, prop-
erty taxation and land use, economic theory, conservation, and resource eco-
nomics. Born in 1923, Mr. Gaffney received his WA. from Reed College and
his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley.
                                      115
116                                               TaxReform toReleaseLand

operative constantly over long periods of time and in the long run may be as
effective as absolute prohibitions or mandates.
   Local real estate taxes affect the landholder directly, and also indirectly by
affecting the way local governments (LGs) use other land use controls. Most
local zoning today has become fiscal zoning, calculated to fortify the local
per capita tax base. That is not news, but it is only the most familiar example
of the role of the real estate tax in the pattern of local particularism.
   The purpose of this paper is to describe the many ways in which real estate
taxes influence urban and suburban land use. Some of these effects are rather
obvious and expected; but others, on analysis, turn out to be different than a
quick and intuitive judgment would predict. In general and in total, real
estate taxes as administered in the United States tend to favor the land
speculator over the builder, the larger owner over the smaller, and the suburbs
over central cities. De facto, real estate taxes as ordinarily administered are an
instrument of economic discrimination. They might, if properly restructured,
become instruments for socially more constructive land use.


                 MOTIVES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

   The art of central government is one of motivating local governments to
act in the wider public interest — to serve the nation by serving themselves.
Local governments (LGs) have objectives and operate under constraints and
incentives just like persons and firms. Economists have analyzed persons and
firms since Adam Smith at least and examined how public policy can work
with the market to harness private motives to public ends. But they have
neglected the analogous question about LGs, and so have political scientists.
   Local governments borrow the sovereignty and police power of the state,
and are assumed in law to represent a public interest. But what public? Each
represents a small and particular public. There are even cases — in California,
of course — of special service districts that are armed with sovereignty and its
trappings, immunities, privileges, and exemptions representing as few as one
landowner.
   Since local governments borrow the sovereignty of the state, the states
have the power and duty to structure local incentives to constrain LGs to
serve all by serving themselves. And so the states do, in many ways, but they
have fallen behind the problem. Today the tension between parochial LG
interests and broader public interests approaches the flash point. It is past
time to be defming the tensions and aiming to resolve them. This is the point
of this forum and this paper.
   The local viewpoint differs from the national in that the local turf is more
completely open to the movement of labor and capital. The LG is defined as
Mason Gaffney                                                             117


an area of land. Men and wealth come and go, and the level of their returns is
set by national market forces, much as the waters of the sea find a common
level by interfiowing. So the benefits of local spending lodge mainly in higher
local land values, because land alone is stationaly for long. By the same
token, the cost of taxes lodges in lower land values. Land is the equity
interest in the municipal corporation. Land income is the bottom line of its
income statement. Many municipal motives may best be understood, there-
fore, as efforts to maximize land income and values.
  There is a harmony here between local and national interest. The private
owner maximizes net income from a given land area by carving it up and
improving and using it so as to maximize its net service flow. The private
owner's greed, harnessed by the market, makes him allocate his land for
housing and complementary life-support facilities in a surprisingly socially
oriented way. One sometimes hears "highest and best use" belittled as though
it were a public nuisance, but basically it means the use serving the most
human needs. That basic rule must be qualified to account for external ef-
fects, but the qualifications are not the rule.
   The same rule holds for the LG, which is a group of landowners in league
to preside over the collective capital that they use jointly. The LG is a
halfway house between the individual landowner and the state. Landowner
control is modified by democracy, which gives the whole system some of its
characteristic tensions and compromises. But landowners, as the permanent
party of every LG, take a strong and steady interest in local government out
of proportion to their numbers. It is reasonably accurate for many purposes
to think of the LG as a collective landowner, maximizing land income. In so
doing it serves the national good.
    While there is that basic harmony of local and national good, LGs feel at
least four pecuniary incentives that make their goals clash with the larger
metropolitan and national welfare. LGs want to avoid dilution of tax base.
They want to minimize tax export. They want to fence off local public goods
from aliens. And they want to avoid pure competition among their members.
No doubt there are more, but these are prominent, and a sufficient basis for
the problems of local exclusivism that vex us today. The factor of ethnic bias
is treated in other papers in this book.

Avoiding Dilution of Tax Base
   The states delegate to LGs certain service duties and certain tax powers to
finance them. Many duties, such as drainage, vary as functions of area rather
than of people; but others, notably education, vary with population. The
property tax is redistributive. So old settlers in each LG are sedulous to see
that immigrants contribute as much in taxes as they require in added spend-
118                                                     Tax Reform to Release Land


ing. Indeed, they go further. They try to limit new entry to those who will
enrich the tax base by the maximum possible amount. Added to this is often
a crabbed and misanthropic outlook on strangers, and a lack of urgency to
develop annexed vacant land, which has led to extremes of exclusivism.
  Whoever said Americans idolize motherhood never looked into suburban
zoning. Whoever said the property tax is regressive is not listening when the
rich grumble about taxing property to finance services to persons. For the
state to require LGs to "tax the rich man's property to educate the poor
man's child" is to invite them to fence out poor families. The tension is partly
resolved by the fact that good schools are, like other local services, capitalized
into higher real estate values. The bromide that property benefits only from
services to property and not from services to people is false. But it is true that
school benefits are in proportion to children and not to taxable real estate.
The municipal manager finds it his duty to keep out children without a large
complement of taxable real estate, and wears a black armband on Mothers
Day.1
  This attitude is not limited to suburbs. President of the U.S. Conference of
Mayors, Milwaukee's Mayor Henry Maier, advocates removing "whole square
miles of people" from central cities.2 Big city mayors have been doing that
for several years, with federally subsidized programs for highways, urban
renewal, land clearance, slum clearance, code enforcement, airport expansion,
open space purchase, attraction of industry, campus expansion, harbor expan-
sion, street widening, and so on. It is not just the lure of the suburbs that has
lowered the density of central cities so far below what it was 30 years ago.
   This exclusionary attitude is not an urban monopoly by any means. Cities
have at least some tradition of welcoming immigrants — that is how they
became cities. Some rural and sylvan areas never have wanted growth, which
is often one reason they remained rural or sylvan. Northern Maine is a cele.
brated case, owned by a handful of timber companies who have opposed the
incorporation of any towns that might tax them to fmance schools and
attract immigrants. In the settlement of the West the very formation of
counties was fought by large ranchers whom the counties might tax. The
Homestead Act, planting smaller farmers everywhere, overcame the resistance
in most counties, and the need for farm labor softened the exclusionary

   'Indeed our current Maithusian agitation may derive its plausibility and social status
by committing the fallacy of composition on the problems of school finance in suburbs
where many social leaders live and form their views of the world, seeing it as a spaceship
suburb threatened by school taxes. It is an unfair extension: children do not dilute world
wealth in the same way they dilute suburban tax bases.
   2Presidential Address, U.S. Conference of Mayors, New Orleans, Washington Post,
June 18, 1972, p. C12.
Mason Gaffney                                                                119


attitude. Today, as the average native student demands longer and costlier
schooling, and as migrant labor competes, eveiy rural county feels a new
impulse to exclude the poorer. Migrant labor does the job without requiring
schools and without voting.

Minimizing Tax Export
   LGs like to help their constituents avoid paying taxes to higher levels of
government. This takes several forms.
  Within counties using the property tax, smaller LGs try to underassess real
estate. Boards of equalization fight this competitive underassessment with
overt success but sometimes fail to redress covert underassessment. Low-use
zoning is underhanded underassessment, because it depresses resale values
during the period before the zoning is breached or lifted. The LG in effect
sets its county assessment low by its own motion. This ploy is invidiously
reserved for LGs whose citizens can collectively afford to forgo resale value
during a prolonged holding period before the zoning is changed.
    A complement of low-use zoning is tax assessment based on present use
rather than market value. Local assessors often find this acceptable to boards
of equalization that would reject more overt forms of competitive underas-
sessment.
    Any local tendency to encourage commerce is discouraged in states that
levy heavy sales taxes and, unlike Iffinois and California, do not return a share
to the LG where collected. With no return, any local sacrifice of environment
to build up commerce would only pour more taxes into the state treasury.
    Property assessment also plays a central role in avoidance of state and
federal income taxes. Income property is tax depreciable. Law and Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) practice allow repeated depreciation by successive
owners, ridiculous as that may be. The law recognizes that land does not
depreciate, so each successive owner can depreciate only the building, not the
land. When he buys he must allocate the cost between depreciable building
and nondepreciable land. Enter the local tax assessor. It is IRS practice to
accept the local assessor's allocation of value between land and buildings.
Local assessors, by undervaluing land relative to buildings, thus help their
constituents depreciate land and so avoid a large share of the income tax due
on real estate, and help convert it from a tax payer to a tax shelter. This is the
modem version of competitive underassessment, one that costs the federal
treasury biffions annually and goes virtually unchecked. This practice creates
a strong local bias to underassess land, which in turn tends, through its direct
effect on landowner incentives, to keep land from serving the needs of the
median consumer.
120                                                 Tax Reform to Release Land


   The income tax hits ordinary income much harder than capital gains
— more than twice as hard, when one knows the angles on capital gains —and

the name of the tax-avoidance game is converting income into capital gain.
One's LG helps. Rather than use public money to help established industry
and commerce earn ordinary income, the LG extends its capital infrastructure
into new land to create capital gains, selling tax-exempt municipal bonds to
raise the capital. The "unearned increment" on the land is the untaxed incre-
ment as well.
   The LG also devotes extra effort to securing state and federal spending and
public works that will raise local land values. To this end it reserves sites,
holding them ready for a new branch of the state university, a military base, a
highway interchange, a defense plant, or whatever. To this end it also seeks to
attract citizens with influence at court, which adds to its bias for the wealthy.
   Blending into the minimizing of tax export is the maximizing of outside
aid. An entire culture of local politics has grown up around the art of plead-
ing poverty. Cities are always "strapped," in "crisis," requiring "relief," and
so on, in spite of the rise of their real estate tax base. This is silly, but a game
people play in dead earnest as they compete for federal dollars. Underassess-
ment is a central part of the game, sequestering latent fiscal assets. So is
regressive assessment, assuring that local taxes hurt and arouse sympathy and
an image of desperation.

Fencing Off Local Public Amenities from Aliens
    LGs provide many public services, such as schools, parks, police and
fire protection, libraries, and others. These municipal amenities yield a flow
of services to theb users — a form of income to these persons that is tax free.
Local taxes used to finance the production of these local amenities are de-
ductible from the individual's taxable income, unlike cash payments for items
of individual consumption. The availability and quality of these local services
raise local land values, as anyone who seeks to buy a house in a neighborhood
with good schools quickly learns; and the increases in land values are largely
tax free, due to the capital gains provisions of income tax law. At a time
when a penny saved is two pennies earned before taxes and tax-free income is
almost the only kind worth having, these are weighty values.
   The problem here is restricting the use of these local amenities to local
residents. The goal is a tenure or right of use that is common but not too
common — common within the small group of local residents, but private
against outsiders. This source of pressure is often very strong. All residents of
the local area have much to gain from exclusive use of local amenities, but
only the large landowner has something to sell if aliens invade the local area
Mason Gaffney                                                            121


by purchase of property. The tenant and small owner have little or no salable
tenure in local amenities — only a shadow equity in the old swimming hole
based on use and custom, familiarity, and their small numbers. They can
suffer real losses from the invasion and crowding of their old haunts.
   To maintain the unstable balance between common amenities and limited
access, suburbanites have developed the cult of open space, a philosophy that
transmutes the exclusionary particularism of the golf course into the nobility
of Naturalism. The apotheosis of open space is to suburban particularism
what "national defense" is to the federal budget. The anomaly of open space
behind cyclone fences is only a contradiction to those who don't get the
subliminal part of the message. Every movement requires a philosophy and
Naturalism has been recruited to serve the local treasury.

Avoiding Pure Competition
   The historical Mercantilistic city was a monopoly, using municipal policy
to exploit its trade territory by restricting competition. Today the motive is
less sharply defmed due to greater mobility, but it is by no means dead.
Owners of old buildings are sensitive to competition from new ones, which
pull away tenants. They know that renewal at higher density adds to supply
and helps lower rents, while renewal at lower density is removal, which de-
livers tenants into the hands of landlords. They mask this with talk of "good
planning," "human scale of density and size," psychoses of crowded labora-
tory rats, birth control, saving historical shrines, aesthetic absolutes, and
other diversions and digressions. So far they have gotten away with it.


                    LOCAL MERCANTILIST POLICIES

   Local governments have other, more basic incentives on which the four
discussed above are superimposed. They want to serve their constituents well
at low cost (subject to Parkinsonian tendencies among bureaucrats, of
course). They seek efficiency, internal equity among voters (even including
tenants), renewal, ordinary (i.e., productive) income, growth of the local
market, and succession of land to higher uses (i.e., uses serving more human
needs). There is a continual tension between the goals, to understand which is
to understand much of municipal behavior.
    LG response to these combined incentives is municipal "Mercantiism" or
"particularism," interchangeable terms emphasizing the pursuit of parochial
self-interest at the expense of outsiders. LGs pursue Mercantilism by bending
all their powers to the goal. These include establishing boundaries, taxing,
122                                               TaxReform toReleaseLand


zoning, allocating capital budgets, planning public works, policing buildings,
pricing municipal services, influencing utility rates, negotiating for new in-
dustries, and a few others.

Balkanization
   The basis of local particularism is segregating the tax base by creating and
defending tax enclaves. Industrial tax enclaves are one type, but they get
more than their share of the spotlight. Resources are a larger member
of the family. "Trees don't go to school," says the timber owner, "why
should I pay taxes?" Mineral owners don't say anything, they just lie low
with nearly total success. Farm landowners, whose real estate weighs in at
over $200 billion, have sold themselves as a collective welfare case. (Their
national average property tax rate is about 1 percent of market value.)
Factory owners on the other hand are blamed for school children, as though
hiring were siring.
    It is a double standard to ponder, as national unemployment rises to crisis
levels while the birthrate drops toward zero population growth. Creating jobs
is not really antisocial, it just seems that way to the local school board. Those
who deploy their capital to employ men are doing a favor to the nation, and
are not adding a bit to national school costs. So the establishment of indus-
trial enclaves, which exclude residences, should not be singled out for avoid-
ing school taxes, any more than farmland, timber, minerals, and utilities.
Employers should pay taxes because they own property, not because they
hire fathers.
   Enclaves established to provide tax havens do not resist "growth" of every-
thing, but only of population. They love to annex land and attract taxable
capital From the parochial viewpoint of modern municipal Mercantilism, the
best industry is the most capital-intensive industry that hires the fewest
fathers per dollar of tax base. Such industries are hypersensitive to property
taxes, and so tend to attract each other and cluster in low-tax enclaves. This is
splendid for them, but hard on everyone else.
   Some suburban residential enclaves, often mixed with rural ones, have
effectively excluded racial and ethnic minorities and low-income people of
every race. Such enclaves have recently been the center of legal and political
efforts to desegregate races and classes and to tap segregated tax bases by
invasion. The enclaves may well deserve the invasion, but let us not forget the
larger tax bases not touchable in this way: forests, farms, minerals, vacation
resorts, factories, utilities, stores, and warehouses. A move to statewide prop-
erty taxation for schools will do more to equalize school resources than
anti-zoning cases. And let us not forget that invading a segregated tax base
wifi almost surely result in relocation of people and businesses in areas they
Mason Gaffney                                                                     123


might well not have chosen but for the lure of the richer tax base they could
share there. Again, statewide school finance has the advantage of equalizing
fiscal resources without requiring or inducing people or businesses to move in
quest of more favorable tax treatment. Some of the longest leaps in the
annals of suburban sprawl have resulted from developers' pioneering in
peripheral rural counties to enjoy their low tax rates.

Administrative Modification of the Property Tax
   Assessors have much latitude, de facto. Most assessors are, for better or
worse, chameleons of municipal policy, and use their latitude to help effect
predominant local goals as seen by the local powers.
   Regressive assessment has been found in many LGs, although never in pure
form. It is mixed with other biases. Some, like the bias against newer build-
ings, tend to countervail regressivity. But most biases probably reinforce it —
for example, the bias for land, the lag in revaluing declining areas downwards
and new areas upwards, the bias against subdivision, the bias against the
unorganized and possibly against blacks, the "wholesale rate" given to large
speculative acreage and larger lots, and basing assessment on present use
rather than value.
   Some recent studies showing or suggesting regressive assessment are by
Oldman and Aaron in Boston; Theodore Smith inHartford; the Urban League
in Atlanta; and Gaffney in Milwaukee.3
   It may be hard to prove regressive or racist motives. They may not even
prevail, although I personally believe they are an influence. The point of
consistency is fiscal particularism, the desire to protect and enrich the local
tax base.
   "Hearth-tax" assessment is a strong tendency. A site is assessed in part by
value, but adjusted for number of families there. The result, and I surmise the
idea behind it, is to remake the property tax into something more like school
tuition.
   Sites without buildings are assessed most lightly of all. No hearth, no tax.
We shall see that taxing buildings reduces population while taxing land in-
creases it. The LG fighting immigration will naturally hit buildings harder.

   3Oliver Oldman and Henry Aaron, "Assessment-Sales Ratios Under the Boston Prop-
erty Tax," National Tax Journal, vol. 18, no. 1 (March 1965), pp. 36—49; Theodore
Smith, Real Property Taxation in the Urban Center (Hartford: J. C. Lincoln Institute,
January 1972); "Report of the Atlanta Urban League on the Fulton County Property
Tax," mimeographed (The Atlanta Urban League, September 1971); Mason Gaffney,
"What is Property Tax Reform?," American Journal of Economics and Sociology,
vol. 31, no. 2 (April 1972), p. 149; and "The Property Tax is a Progressive Tax," S. J.
Bowers, ed., 1971 Proceedings of 64th Annual Conference of National Tax Association
(Columbus: National Tax Association, 1972), p. 415.
124                                              Tax Reform to Release Land


   Land assessment based on present use is part of the pattern. It is not true
that taxing ripening land ad valorem forces premature use, but it is true that
raising land assessments at the time of subdivision or other conversion to
higher use is a powerful force postponing such conversion. It creates a
locked-in effect, like the capital gains tax that waits on sale. The assessor's
propensity to assess land use rather than value is reinforced and abetted by
low-use zoning, discussed below.
   There is tension here, and ambivalence. LG taxpayers would like the un-
developed acreage to share the load. But they hold back, in an uneasy truce:
we don't tax you; you don't crowd our schools.
   The property tax is also modified by exemptions provided by state law.
LGs are not omnipotent over this, but they have a choice of what exemptions
to fight. The Milwaukee tax commissioner, for example, fights to disexempt
dormitories, hospital annexes, and nursing homes — capital that serves
people's needs. On the other hand he does not fight to tax cemeteries that
preempt as much land as industry and hold most of it in reserve for future
burials while life-support systems are taxed instead. Nor does he fight to tax
the vast grounds surrounding many institutions, or to assess golf courses at
market value. Cities blame the states and plead impotence, yet much of the
exempt land is owned by agencies of the city itself: industrial land banks,
harbor commissions, redevelopment authorities, and many agencies with ad-
vance sites. Thus cities evince a preference for the kinds of tax exemption
that reduce the supply of buildings (other than private schools, which help
hold down school taxes).

Forcing Property Consumption by Direct Control
   One way to enrich the property tax base is to require every resident to use
no less than a standard complement of land and capital, and exclude those
who will not. This is forced consumption.
   It is a pretty expensive indirect way to collect taxes, something like
Charles Lamb's description of a mythical Chinese practice of burning down a
house to roast a pig. It could raise a family's yearly debt service or other
yearly capital costs by $10.00 in order to increase tax returns by $1.00. The
lower the tax rate, the greater the forced consumption of real estate required
per dollar of tax revenue. And low tax rates do not weaken the motive, which
is to avoid increasing rates, from whatever level.
    LGs force land consumption by using zoning, subdivision control, building
codes, and condemnation power.
   Zoning. Low-density zoning is the focus of today's perception of this set
of devices, and is discussed by others in this forum. It is simply forced land
consumption. Indirectly it also forces the individual to consume more capital,
Mason Gaffney                                                               125


because large homes go with large lots. It very directly forces LGs to sink
more capital in all public works, the costs of which vary as functions of area,
not population.
   It is ironic that low-density zoning is viewed by some as a defense against
urban expansion. It forces urbanites to consume more land, and cities to
spread out, even if working ideally. The way it normally works, it thwarts
demand for better land and sends developers probing outward seeking weak
spots in the zoning umbrella. High-density land use thus erupts capriciously
here and there, and threatens everywhere, rather than clustering where it
belongs. The protection of nature and open space against man, purportedly a
reason for low-density zoning, is not achieved. Man is frustrated in his quest
for land, and more of nature is displaced than if he were satisfied. Zoning to
protect nature is a boomerang policy. Touted as a solution, it has become a
large part of the problem.
   It is ironic that zoning is used as a defense against higher school enroll-
ments and hence against higher taxes, for low density inflates most other
public costs. Jumpy, uneven, unpredictable sprawl inflates them even more.
The added costs are net social costs to the nation; the school savings are just
transfers, local gains achieved by imposing the cost on others, or depriving
children altogether. The national result is a tragic waste of resources to no
purpose.
   Agricultural zoning is the most extreme kind of exclusionary zoning, fol-
lowed by large-lot zoning in horsey exurbs. But zoning is universal. Zoning
extends clear to the center of the city, where it takes the form of floor-area
ratios, height limits, and setbacks. At every stage it interdicts market choices
for more intensive use. Usually this is a direct bias against the poor. Luxury
high-rise apartments and some office buildings cater to the affluent, but the
indirect effect of suppressing them also hits the poor, as the rich are forced to
bid for more land.
   As you might expect, LGs overzone for uses regarded as fiscal surplus
generators, and underzone for deficit-makers. There is often a lack of careful
counting of supply and demand, and a tendency to reserve most of the land
for a small share of the market, regionwide. The fiscal motive is mixed with a
variety of subjective value judgments and weakly based, strongly held opin-
ions about high-rise apartment living, ethnic outgroups, and aesthetics. Some
results of exclusionary zoning are capricious and hard to explain rationally, as
with any human endeavor: what is regarded as a local liability often reflects
more prejudice than analysis. But even with perfect knowledge, there would
be a zoning bias.
   Too much land is zoned for commerce and industry in most cities. Some
rich suburbs zone them out as nuisances, but that is the exception: few can
afford the luxury. The classic "good reason" for zoning is to protect ivy-
126                                              Tax Reform toReleaseLand


covered cottages from gas stations and rendering plants, but in most LGs the
zoning gives these nuisance uses a wide choice of sites among dwellings. The
ivy-covered cottages are the nuisance: they produce the fiscal pollutant,
school kids. Many have to invade industrially and commercially zoned land,
because so little is zoned residential.
   The main limit on commercial zoning is imposed by influential merchants
to stifle competition. Zoning boards entertain as quite legitimate, legal, and
respectable the plea that commercial zoning be denied a newcomer because it
would hurt someone else's business. The common law rule against monopolies
is easily forgotten. This is in keeping with the historical municipal Mercantil-
ism of monopolistic city-states.
    Zoning often determines property tax assessments. From the land specu-
lator's viewpoint, the ideal is farm zoning and a low assessed value during the
ripening period, with the option to secure high-density zoning at the time of
his choosing. Many have succeeded in achieving this. The rest of the commun-
ity appreciates the speculator's not diluting the local tax base by developing,
but would also appreciate his enriching it by paying taxes. There are other
pros and cons in each case, too, and great variety in the compromises struck.
But there is a common theme: zoning is used to hold down property tax
assessments on ripening land. Zoning helped to change the property tax from
a tax on present and potential land value to a tax on land use, activity, and
human occupancy. It reinforces and legitimizes the assessment discrimination
that occurs even without zoning. The assessment discrimination, in turn,
helps keep land in low-density use or cold storage, withheld in either case
from the poor.
   Subdivision controL LGs have power to refuse subdivisions, and can make
them meet standards. It is an obvious occasion for upgrading, and goldplating
street improvements has become the rule. An aerial photograph shows vast
areas in subdivision paving, planned to repel through traffic, used entirely for
local access. The result: expensive lots, as intended.
   Some LGs impose what are in effect special taxes on new building tracts by
requiring donations of land for school sites. These add to the price of new
houses, limiting supply and excluding poorer buyers.
   A pernicious byproduct of imposing extra costs on subdividing is an exag-
gerated propensity to build without subdividing, where possible. This means
stringing buildings out along trunk roads fmanced by city, state, or the
United States. Interior land is sterile, or worse, divided into bowling alley
lots. Settlement is linear, guaranteeing a minimum of linkage, and a maximum
of interference and congestion. The resultant low density makes public trans-
port uneconomic, leading to total dependence on private autos —another
exclusionary device.
Mason Gaffney                                                               127


   Building codes. The worthy purposes of codes, like other devices, are
easily subverted to exclusionary ends, and probably have been. "Every build-
ing a Cadillac" is hard on Datsun budgets. Occupancy limits further require
that the Cadillac have empty seats.
    Grandfather clauses let standards be focused on new buildings, the cutting
edge of supply, without threatening old ones. This, too, acts against renewal.
    It is grotesque to watch HUD struggling with its Operation Breakthrough,
as though cheap housing waited on engineering advances. The theory of Cul-
tural Lag has been a commonplace for decades, yet technocratic minds keep
seeking physical solutions to institutional problems. American industry has
offered us a good cheap dwelling unit called a trailer for as long as the life of
the theory of Cultural Lag. The reason it does not solve our housing shortage
is not to be found on the assembly line, but in the Assembly Chamber. LGs
will not let them in, largely because they dilute the tax base.

    Condemnation. Many cities condemn old buildings for safety and health
reasons. This does, where applied, bring euthanasia to structures forced into
the geriatric stage by policy. But the emphasis is on clearance, riddance, and
removal, not on rebuilding. Like federal urban renewal, condemnation lends
itself to policies of exclusion.
    LG authorities would condemn old buildings more vigorously if welfare
were all locally financed. Large federal sharing in welfare makes old slums
much less a local liability than otherwise. The main local liability remains the
school child.
    Condemnation operates in reverse when a forsaken gargoyle, cornice,
aesthetic or "historical" antiquity is threatened by market forces. People who
look the other way when poor families are driven from their condemned
homes may often be found rallying to save a shrine that symbolizes what they
define as history or tradition. If it stands in the way of a housing project, so
much the better.

   Taste conformity. Some LGs have architectural review or fine arts com-
missions and the like, with certain powers to save antiquities, prohibit non-
conforming styles, and so on. Ostensibly they are concerned with aesthetics,
and no doubt they are, but taste standards are subjective and often absolutist.
As Veblen taught, an objective factor in taste is waste, preferably dignified by
age and obsolescence, tempered by modesty in display. But modesty in dis-
play entails setbacks, leading to immodest land requirements, the ultimate
symbol of financial respectability, reserve power under leash, and priority of
status. Class bias may masquerade as anger at the greed of developers, and
fear of children as love of beauty. The end result is another fence against the
poor.
128                                                 TaxReform toReleaseLand


Regressive Regulatory Bias
   Utility rate regulation nearly eveiywhere ignores the fact that distribution
cost gets lower as density rises and gets higher with distance from the load
center. Yet at today's low densities, distribution (or collection) has become
far and away the major cost in almost all utilities, so total costs are domi-
nated by density of settlement. The cost varies as a function of area pri-
marily, and only incidentally with volume per meter. Rates do not reflect
these differential costs. Discounts, indeed, go to the large individual buyer,
irrespective of density. Many large individual buyers are at low density and
far out, and should pay higher rates.
   Thus "rich territory" subsidizes the lean, and small lots subsidize the large.
Utility rates are a regressive tax. Owners of large lots and of undivided vacant
land are spared part of the costs of services available to them and hence are
under less pressure to subdivide their land.
   If the surpluses wrung from small users of land in this fashion went to
local school boards, LGs might welcome the poor. But the surpluses are
pooled, instead, over utility networks covering many LGs. The local school
district is hit with the cost of the children living at high density, while the
benefit of low per capita utility costs is diffused over a wide system. As a
result many LGs use their power over certain mass systems, mainly sewer and
water, to control immigration. They can block subdivision with "sewer
power" by refusing sewers, pleading undercapacity — and then fail to increase
capacity.
   Meanwhile, building continues at the low densities appropriate to private
individual water wells and septic tanks. Capital costs are high, and screen out
the poor. Large-tract platting preempts land and precludes subdivision. In
terms of sewer and water service this pattern of land settlement makes no
sense at all. It is a device of local fiscal particularism, calculated to fortify the
per capita tax base. And it is growing. Those who put much hope in cracking
snob zoning as the route to reform, take note. LGs have several lines of
defense.

Allocation of Municipal Funds
  The tendency of cities to tilt capital and operating budgets toward their
upper classes is widely observed. In recent years, Milwaukee cleared a large
urban renewal project area, evicting scores of families stacked up in the
ghetto — but scheduled all its capital budget for city utilities into expansion
onto raw land, zoned for large lots. The specifics are available but the point is
not Milwaukee. If it were just one city we could laugh at the human circus.
But this is a national epidemic, and where are these "whole square miles" of
Mason Gaffney                                                                129


poor people to find a resting place short of the whole square miles of tax-
exempt land reserved for cemeteries?

Industrial Promotion, Federal Programs, and Other Policies
   In seeking industry, there is a hierarchy of desirables. It is based largely on
capital intensity. Capital means taxes; labor means school children. Cities
seeking industry use all their seffing wiles to favor capital over labor.
   Cities have primary control over sales of cleared land under federally sub-
sidized urban renewal programs. Sales and conditions are dominated by fiscal
bookkeeping, in keeping with other policies.
   There are dozens of ways that city policy affects land use — too many to
catalog here. Step by step, a city's motives determine the result. Today, the
motive is to repel poor people, and many programs develop that thrust.
   Without itemizing every policy, note the implication of the fact that there
are many. If local government is to function meaningfully it must have
powers and areas of discretion. Anti-Mercantilist policies of central govern-
ment should aim at restructuring incentives, therefore, rather than at impos-
ing federal control on every specific power, as by categorical grants. The
virtues of local autonomy are those of independence, human scale of organi-
zation, contact with local needs, and quick responses. These are to be pre-
served and cherished. To overcome LG Mercantiism by direct controls is to
destroy local autonomy, a price too high to pay, especially since we don't
have to. The alternative is to make it fiscally advantageous for LGs to attract
people so that they will compete for families instead of for capital and land.
This brings us to the subject of taxes.


                    THE PROPERTY TAX, LAND USE,
                    AND MUNICIPAL MERCANTILISM

   The property tax is at the heart of fiscal Mercantilism in today's American
cities. It is a control over land use — the most powerful and pervasive of all,
and the most flexible. It has been used as an exclusionary device, but it can
be, and to some extent has been used as a promotional device, depending on
how the assessor allocates real estate value between land and buildings. The
property tax can be a lever for the reform of LG Mercantilism.
   Property taxes affect several aspects of land use: intensity, frequency of
demolition and renewal, size of parcel, choice of location of improvements,
and the time when land is ripe for higher use. In the aggregate, property taxes
affect the supply of buildings and floor space in each LG jurisdiction. The
property tax not only raises money, it controls land use, redistributes wealth,
130                                                Tax Reform toReleaseLand


and dominates LG Mercantilism. It wants a close analytical look. Analysis
may entail some pain. But, as your dentist says, it only hurts a little, and it
should improve your bite.
  The property tax is at least three taxes: one on land, one on buildings, and
one on personal property (in practice, business inventories). Each has its
distinctive effects. I treat the first two separately, and omit the last, which is
the smallest, in the interest of brevity.
   The effect of property taxes depends among other things on how high the
real rate is. A rough national mean today might be about 1%-2 percent with
a wide dispersion about the mean. At these levels the tax rate is still not very
high next to interest rates at 8 percent or so, and annual inflation at 4 percent
or so. But the effect of the tax rate may outweigh the effect of interest at an
equal rate if the interest is only forgone interest on equity, because the tax is
a cash outgo. There are many LGs, too, where real rates are above 3 percent,
or are threatening to be. There are a few up around 7 percent with Newark
and Boston. Here the property tax is a major control.

Intensity of Use
   Taxes on buildings. The property tax on buildings is a percentage of their
value and is therefore something like an increase in the mortgage interest rate.
Interest is the largest cost by far in building, as it is with all very durable
goods; over the life of a building, interest on investment is greater than the
principal, the latter representing payments to construct the building. The
property tax added onto this cost and recurring annually for 50-100 years is
the second largest cost, unless rates are uncommonly low.
  The effect of raising building costs is to reduce building. And when one
does build, everything about a building that is marginal is made submarginal.
Every individual site, considered in isolation, is less intensively improved.
Chopped off are marginal increments to quality, beauty, safety, pollution
control, convenience, fireproofing, quakeproofing, insulation, durability,
height, and all aspects of intensity (excepting lot coverage, discussed sepa-
rately). In essence, one applies less capital per unit of land. It is a matter of
diminishing returns of capital applied to land.
   It is a sad fact of life that egoism precedes altruism, and much of what is
marginal to an owner is that which is there to impress, please, and avoid
offending and endangering his neighbors. What is marginal to the owner is of
more than marginal value to the health of neighborhoods, so the loss of
marginal increments to one owner's capital is a collective loss of consequence.
In some jurisdictions it has been found that building owners neglect exterior
appearance specifically and selectively because they believe it influences asses-
Mason Gaffney                                                               131


sors. The celebrated case of the Seagrams Building assessment in Manhattan,
although extreme, lends credence to this notion. The Seagrams Building as-
sessment was raised 50 percent because of its good looks.4
    Taxing buildings makes capital dearer, motivates people to substitute land
for capital, and encourages horizontal spread. Vertical rise meets increasing
capital costs, whereas horizontal spread enjoys decreasing capital costs, up to
a point, and saves on capital by consuming more land.
    This produces the anomaly that taxing buildings, although it lowers inten-
sity, acts to increase lot coverage. By putting a premium on horizontal spread,
it encourages the building to invade the yard. This might be overcome by
enlarging the lot, but here one runs directly into his neighbor trying to do the
same thing. A corollary is artificially forced demand for land, and higher land
prices. In time this also leads to urban expansion and larger lots.
    High rise is sometimes painted as a desperate expedient of poverty, but it
is more accurately seen as a luxury that lets us enjoy the benefits of closer
living without walling off all open space. The luxury is available when capital
is cheap. Taxing buildings makes capital artificially dear and prices this luxury
out of the market.
    Where lot coverage is limited by zoning and buildings are taxed, horizontal
spread cannot substitute for height. The net result is limited height and a
reduction in the carrying capacity of the land of the LG. The tax is another
form of forced land consumption — less direct than zoning, and with other
side effects.
  Taxes on land value. These would be neutral in their effect on land use
under the simplifying but unreal assumption that there is a perfect market for
capital. The tax cost does not add to the interest cost of holding land, but
displaces it. Forgone interest on equity falls as the tax lowers the price of
land. Simple algebra shows that the decline of interest cost exactly equals the
increase of tax levy — that is the classic theory of tax capitalization (see
Appendix, section I).
   But in fact, interest rates vary among people. They are regressive — the
poor pay more. Land taxes, assuming true assessment, are not regressive.
Substituting taxes for interest therefore undoes the effect of regressive inter-
est rates. It hits the rich owner harder than the poor. This is the theory of
differential capitalization of land taxes. It gives the land tax a progressive
quality (see Appendix).
   Differential capitalization increases the bidding power of the poor for
land, causing them to encroach on lands held by the rich. This occurs through

   4Life, August 16, 1963, p. 4.
132                                                Tax Reform toReleaseLand


subdivision of large holdings, accelerated release of ripening land to higher
uses, consolidation of very small holdings, and sales of land from the rich to
the poor.
   The effect of land taxes on intensity of land use is therefore not a simple
plus or minus. The effect is equalizing as among classes. Land taxes let the
poor, who live crowded on poor land, live less crowded and move to better
land. They lower density for the poor by raising it for the rich, who own
most of the land.
   That is not widely understood. It is often advanced that land taxes "force
land into use," and result in higher density. This simplicity is catchy and will
not easily give way. But it is misleading. Land taxes crowd the rich, but open
up more land for the poor. Only from the standpoint of the wealthy are land
taxes simply intensifying. The land tax is rather redistributive.
   In terms of finding land to house and serve the mass market and the poor,
this kind of redistribution is a virtue. But at the local level, it runs counter to
Mercantiist needs by increasing population, attracting immigrants of only
average wealth, and whetting competition. This is why the exclusive taxation
of site values has not been more widely supported by LGs. The state and
national incentive structures are not gauged to make its results unambigu-
ously attractive to them.
   Land taxes focused on central land also tend to lower intensity of land use
in fringe areas by meeting demand on central land and so weakening out-
thrusting demand. Those who choose to go exurban thus achieve lower den-
sity, too.

Timing of Demolition and Renewal
   Short-run effects. When a building is old, the effect of building taxes is
probably to lengthen its life, and certainly to defer the renewal of its site.
   It is not the taxes on the old building itself that lengthen its tenure. On the
contrary, they may cause premature demolition and replacement by a parking
lot or a nothing if the owner can count on the assessor then lowering the
valuation, a point on which local practice varies.
   What does defer renewal is the threat of taxes on the successor building.
Building on a parcel of real estate is the occasion for a large increase in the
tax bill. This throws a weight into the scales of decision between old and new.
The year that would be optimal for renewal in the absence of taxes now looks
premature to the owner, because of the tax difference.
   So long as taxes depend on the use to which land is put, they intercede in
the competition of the market in favor of the lower taxed use and alter
decisions at the margin. Here it is a matter of one particular application of
that general principle: the margin of decision between old and new. Building
Mason Gaffney                                                              133


taxes are heavier on the new and weight the decision against it. They may
defer renewal for any number of years and decades, depending on particulars.
Because of neighborhood effects, which are mutually reinforcing, what defers
renewal of the individual site for 25 years may defer renewal of neighbor-
hoods and cities for 50 years or in some cases forever. The city may die.
Some cities are dying in this way. Perfectly good land is abandoned, rendered
unrenewable by the cumulative neighborhood effects of counterproductive
tax policy.
    Land taxes are more neutral than building taxes in the renewal decision,
and in perfect capital markets they might be completely so. In practice they
accelerate renewal because they drain cash from holdouts waiting for high
bids from builders. According to the portion of tax theory that looks at
marginal incentives and ignores the wealth and liquidity effects of taxes, land
taxes are simply neutral, and in an important sense that is true. But taxes
affect behavior in more than marginal ways. They affect it through changing
relative wealth and holdout power and credit ratings. The effect of a cash
drain on a holdout far outweighs the effect of an equal value of forgone
interest on equity because the cash drain lowers his wealth and liquidity. The
cash drain of land taxes also conveys information to many owners who are
only vaguely aware that they are holding a resource of high salvage value to
society. Land taxes build a fire under sleeping owners. Anyone who talks
with owners of ripening land soon learns that many who are not in debt
perceive their holding costs in terms of taxes more than forgone interest,
though the latter be five to ten times as high; and in legislature assembled
they put their faith in preferential low assessment of ripening land when they
want to forestall its urbanization. If money talks, the tax dollar outtalks the
interest dollar, at least the dollar of forgone interest on equity, which speaks
in a whisper.
   Long-run effects. Taxes also affect the planned life of buildings. Because
they act like higher interest rates, they discourage durability, which may be
perceived as substituting capital for labor. From this, it is easy to infer that
building taxes act to shorten planned life. Easy, but wrong, for the taxes also
force substituting land for capital. In the discussion of intensity of use, that
meant spreading out in space. Here it means spreading out in time, letting
structures stand a long time before demolition.
   So we seem to have two contrary forces at work. Building taxes cause us
to build less durable structures, but then to defer demolition. These two
forces are consistent in that each helps save on capital. They are at odds in
that the first appears to shorten life, the second to lengthen it.
   The matter is resolved by distinguishing service life from carcass life of
buildings. Taxing buildings makes us shorten service life, but lengthen carcass
134                                                Tax Reform to Release Land


life, thus creating a geriatric afterlife of buildings during which they occupy
space without doing much good. Houses are built for faster recovery of
capital but slower recovery of site, so that the shells of old structures, the
ghosts of departed values, stand to haunt us after they have been drained of
most of their serviceability.
   This reinforces the short-run effect. Old buildings stay with us a long time,
thanks to taxes on buildings, and they stay with us yielding less service.
   There are those who oppose demolitions on the ground that they destroy
housing for the poor. Federal Urban Renewal Programs and other removal
programs have been frightful in this respect, and wanton demolition for
"slum clearance" is surely to be condemned. The proposal made by John and
Ursula Hicks to exempt new buildings while taxing old5 is to be faulted for
forcing premature demolition. But taxing buildings as generally practiced in
the United States today is not defensible on the grounds that it defers demoli-
tion because it does so only by weakening the profit motive to rebuild and
increase supply. Indeed, taxing old buildings, taken by itself, often causes
premature demolition, long before land is ripe for renewal. In tandem with
the tax threat against new buildings, it lengthens the dead period between
buildings when land is held out of service.
   As to land taxes, they are again more neutral, subject to the qualification
that the market for capital be perfect. But taxes affect behavior in at least
two ways. There is the effect on marginal incentives, discussed above; then
there is the wealth effect. Land taxes are neutral in respect to marginal
incentives, but they have a definite wealth effect, especially in contrast to the
taxation of buildings. Taxing buildings drains wealth from, and creates liquid-
ity crises, for builders; taxing land serves the same discipline to nonbuilders
and to the holders of obsolete and inadequate improvements. By this mechan-
ism land taxes affect the market sharply.

Size of Parcel
  We have seen that taxing buildings causes the substitution of land for
capital. The immediate impact is increased lot coverage. The secondary im-
pact is bigger lots. If there is just so much land in a city, lots cannot get
bigger, and the result is simply higher land values. But if a city can spread out,
it does, under this influence.
    Similarly, taxing buildings discourages subdivision where that means more
capital per acre. It discourages converting old estates to middle-class housing,
for example, because the tax bill would rise.

  5J. and U. Hicks, Report on Finance and Taxation in Jamaica (Kingston: Govern-
ment Printer, 1955), chapter 10.
Mason Gaffney                                                                        135


   Apartments might seem to be an exception because they involve assembly,
but the exception is only specious. The ownership of apartments is unified, as
a rule, but the use is subdivided. So subdivision, broadly construed, includes
the building of apartments. A tax on buildings is quite consistent in its bias
against this kind of land use.
   Land taxes are not neutral in their effect on the size of parcels, for a
reason already cited. Interest paid or forgone is the main cost of holding land.
Interest rates are regressive, and as a result, the use of land is regressive. This
means that those who enjoy low interest rates spread out over land that at the
margin yields them less service than it would yield their credit-pinched rivals.
Land taxes displace the interest cost of holding land by a tax cost. They fall
harder on those who enjoy lower interest rates and larger land holdings. They
tend therefore — assuming true assessment — to equalize land holdings.

Choice of Location
   The effect of taxing buildings is not merely incremental in the manner
treated so far. It changes the relative bidding power of different uses, and
changes the structure of cities.
    In a perfect market, uses needing high accessibility cluster around a center
of maximum access. Access is mutual, so the presence of those seeking access
is a net benefit to others seeking access, and clustering is self-reinforcing, up
to a point. Likewise, uses needing specific mutual access, or access to the
same people or things, cluster in specialized neighborhoods and districts.
Aggregate transportation needs are minimized, for any level of linkage. There
is a logic to market decisions — the "highest and best" use in the market sense
also has a good claim to approximating highest and best use in a more ulti-
mate sense of social good.6 So it is a social cost of moment to deny the
market allocation of land without some good reason like a playground, mini-
park, or street.
   Two rival uses compete on equal terms for land, and represent equally high
and good use, when they have the same imputed site value, S.

(1)                                S=PVR-C
where PVR is the present value of revenues (net, discounted), and Cis cost of
construction. It is the difference between PVR and C that makes site value,

   6For further discussion and sources, see Mason Gaffney, "Land Rent, Taxation, and
Public Policy," Papers of the Regional Science Association, vol. 23 (1970), pp. 141 —153;
and "The Sources, Nature and Functions of Urban Land Rent," American Journal of
Economics and Sociology, July 1972, pp. 241 -57.
136                                                Tax Reform toReleaseLand


not the absolute size of either. Thus a gas station can sometimes compete
with an apartment; though present value of revenues is less, so is construction
cost. But the effect of building taxes varies with C, the tax base. As between
two uses equally high and good, i.e., with an equal difference of PVR and C,
the building tax intercedes in favor of the one of lower construction cost (C).
Although its revenue is less, the gas station outbids the apartment because the
apartment would have paid more building taxes.
   This is a matter of leverage. A given percentage increase in cost cuts deeper
into the residual land value afforded by the more intensive use, because its
cost is higher relative to the land value. Let us give that some precision and
generality.
  We begin by converting the stream of future building taxes to a lump sum,
their present value (PV). "Present value" of the stream means if you bor-
rowed PV and paid it off on the installment plan over the life of the building,
your annual payment would be the amount of your building tax. The PV of
an annual payment of $1 over sixty years is a lump sum of around $13
(discounting future dollars at 7 percent per year compounded). So a property
tax rate of 1 percent of building cost is equivalent to a present value of 13
percent of building cost.
   This comes out of what a builder can bid for land. He reduces his bid by
13 percent of the cost of the planned building (C). The higher is C, the more
the disadvantage.
   Let us couch this in terms of the percentage drop in what competing uses
can bid for a site. The absolute drop, for each 1 percent of tax rate, is:

(2)                            —S = 0.13C.
That drop as a percentage of site value is:

(3)                          —AS/S = 0.13C/S.

C/S for a high-rise structure might run 8/1. Since 8 X 0.13 = 104 percent,
the tax reduces the bid by more than 100 percent and so wipes out the site
value.
   For a $70,000 gas station on a $140,000 hot corner, C/S is ½. Since
½ X 0.13 = 6½ percent, the oil company can bid only 6½ percent less than
if there were no taxes. The effect of building taxes is to give the less intensive
use a comparative advantage over the more intensive.
    That does not mean the total abolition of high-rise buildings everywhere.
This is not the way the world works. It means gas stations get more land, and
better land. (They also spread out.) Apartments get less land, and worse.
(They also are built shorter.) Gas stations move into the center; apartments
Mason Gaffney                                                               137


move outwards. This helps account for the anomaly of intensive uses popping
up on poor land and mixed in with much lower uses, while low uses preempt
much of the central land. In general there is a poorer matching of buildings
and uses with sites.
   The above is a picture of urban disintegration. Our ways of imposing taxes
play a role in making cities sprawl. Sprawl, in turn, with attendant suburban
enclavization, weakening of metropolitan community ties and facilities, and
automobile dependency, spawns many of the problems of class conflict that
concern us now.
   More directly, the bias against uses with a high building-cost/site-value
ratio (C/S) is a bias against the poor, who live crowded at much higher
density than the rich and on land of lower unit value as a rule.
   I noted earlier that the tax on buildings affected incentives somewhat as
would a rise of interest rates. Here we reach the limits of that parallel. The
building tax is more specifically targeted against intensive use than is the
interest rate. In the extreme, on an unpaved parking lot yielding income with
no building, the building tax does not lower its value a bit, while a higher
interest rate would lower the value. More generally, in (1), building taxes are
proportional to C, while higher interest rates have an effect which is propor-
tional to PVR. Thus the artificial scarcity of capital caused by the building
tax is more disruptive to the integrity of urban linkages than is a natural
scarcity of capital reflected in high interest rates. Indeed, high interest rates
would also make roads and affied infrastructure costlier, raising horizontal
transportation costs and raising the premium on central location.

Ripening of Land for Higher Use
   Criteria of ripeness. Under dynamic conditions, land is often in transit
from one use to another and usually higher use. In anticipation of a move, it
develops an "expectation value," or speculative value, that is higher than
income from the current best use will support. When should the owner take
the quantum jump and initiate the higher use? When is the land ripe for the
change?
   The choice of ripeness date (D) is difficult because a durable building,
indivisible in construction, must be placed on the land to shift its use. As
demand for the site grows with each succeeding year, the hypothetical opti-
mal improvement that one would put up if he were going to build in that year
changes. Each succeeding year's optimal building yields more net present
value to the land.
   To avoid premature, preclusive underimprovement or other irreversible
error one postpones building — but not forever. R. T. Ely identified himself
with the doctrine of "ripening costs" in which he argued the case for deferral,
138                                                      Tax Reform to Release Land


but he failed to supply a criterion for ripeness. D-date (ripeness) arrives when
the value imputed to the site by each succeeding year's hypothetical optimal
building stops rising faster than the interest rate.7 (This is the same as select-
ing the date that maximizes present value of the land as of any fixed calendar
year.) By not building in Year 1 you forgo — and thus in effect invest — the
present value of site (S1) realizable by building in Year ito gain 2 in Year 2,
orS3,S4,. . . ,S,.Ifany

(4)                             S, > S1 (1 + i)' -1

then the value of holding the uncommitted site grows faster than money in
the bank and is a good investment.
   In addition, there is current site income (a i) from the tag end of the prior
use, or from some interim use. Adding these in, a site is not ripe so long as

(5)                              (a1 + iS)/S1 > i
Note that IS is not just the yearly rise of land value in the market, but is
       S1 as defined in the previous paragraph. S is "use value." It is below
      —

market value until the optimal year of building, at which time use value has
risen to equal market value. Market value is use value at D-date (ripeness)
discounted, so market value grows at the investor's rate of interest. Use value
(5) grows faster than that until ripeness, by defmition of ripeness.
   Taxing buildings affects ripeness. We have seen that taxing buildings re-
duces site values derived from buildings and applies leverage against intensive
building. It follows that taxing buildings affects the growth rate of site values,
assuming that the optimal building-cost/site-value ratio (C/S) changes with
ripening. Thus taxing buildings affects the date of ripeness.
   I shall show the following. As land ripens, the effect of taxes on the
ripeness date depends on whether further waiting would lead to a higher or
lower C/S ratio. Normally it leads to a lower ratio; C rises, but S rises by a
higher rate. The effect of taxes is then to retard ripeness. They make one
more disposed to sacrifice an earlier for a later use.
   This is the kind of elusive relationship that algebra was invented to nail
down. To simplify, assume no current income from a prior or interim use. To
simplify the notation, the present value of the stream of future net revenues,

      7Mason Gaffney, "Replacement of Individual by Mass System," Proceedings of
American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association, vol. 4 (1969), pp. 21—68. This
piece also treats the effect on ripeness of later generations of use, a point omitted here.
Mason Gaffney                                                                139


PVR in equation (1), is denoted simply as R. The growth rate of use value (5)
is:

(6)
                                S
                                       _____
                                        R-C
   Let T be the present value of future building taxes, expressed as a percent-
age of C. (We previously illustrated T as 13 percent for a 1 percent tax rate;
about 15-40 percent is normal, depending on the tax rate and the discount
rate.) After taxes, assumed to lodge in lower site values:

                           S_R—C(1+T)
()
7
                            S R—C(l+T)
Taxes proportional to LC reduce S, because iC comes out of IXS. But taxes
also reduce S, the denominator of the rate. Which factor prevails? The rules
of algebra provide an answer.
   The effect of taxes is to raise the growth rate of S if:


 8                     iR—zC(1+T)>zR—zC
                         R — C(1 + T)               R— C

     By cancellation (or inspection), (8) implies

(Q\                                 ZC     zR
                                     C<R
   By inspection, (9) is true if C/R is falling. I shall call C/R the cost/benefit
ratio. From (1), R is (C + 5), the sum of building and land value, so:

                                    C_ C
(1)                                 RC+S
Thus C/R is simply the share of building cost in real estate value. Falling C/R
implies falling C/S as well.
   Intuitively we think that land npens into higher intensity, but intuition is
a blind guide here because it compares incommensurables: building value per
unit of land area. Economic intensity compares commensurables: building
value and land value. Our C/S and C/R are proper indices to economic inten-
sity.
140                                                  Tax Reform to Release Land


      For several reasons, I believe ripening usually entails a drop in C/R. C rises,
but R rises at a higher rate, so C/R falls. These reasons are developed in
section II of the Appendix. So the usual effect of taxing buildings is to retard
ripeness by raising the percentage growth rate of the use value of the site. I
conclude that the paramount effect of building taxes on ripeness is to defer
it.
    The demonstration above must be tempered to allow for the evasive action
of the taxpayer faced with the threat of a tax on buildings. This modification
is in section III of the Appendix.
      Occasionally, ripening would lead to a higher dR. Then the effect of
building taxes is to advance ripeness by making the later use relatively less
attractive. The point of consistency is that intensity loses either way. Taxing
buildings makes landholders more patient to wait for lower uses, but less
patient to wait for higher uses. But section II of the Appendix shows that
excessive patience is the rule.
   Neighborhood effects add to the retarding influence of building taxation.
Part of ripening is not waiting so much for greater demand but for greater
certainty. Certainty means waiting for neighbors to commit themselves. But
Alphonse waiting for Gaston simply perpetuates uncertainty when Gaston is
waiting for Alphonse. Much of the rationale for ripening is a hyperindividual-
istic one that does not bear examination from a social viewpoint and can only
be painted a social good by committing the fallacy of composition. "We have
no plans," said a San Francisco land speculator, "we're waiting for other
people's plans." In such a context, whoever leads off ripens his neighbor's
land and shortens the sterile downtime of land between major improvements.
Building taxes that retard the improvement of one site thus retard the ripe-
ness of neighboring complementary sites by generating uncertainty. Uncer-
tainty of this kind in a highly complementary urban neighborhood is an
external nuisance every bit as noxious as odors, fumes, noises, and shadows.
    I remarked earlier that the property tax on buildings affects investor be-
havior somewhat as would a rise of the interest rate. In respect to ripening
that is not true. A higher interest rate would also require the use value of sites
(S) to grow faster to remain unripe; but a higher building tax rate has no such
effect. Indeed, the macro nationwide effect of having buildings taxed in all
jurisdictions is to lower the level of interest rates that investors require land
to earn.
    Turning to land taxes, they would be largely neutral if credit markets were
 costless. It is widely believed that they speed up ripening, but the belief has
 been wrongly rationalized. It rests mostly on assuming that land taxes are
 piled on top of interest costs of holding land. But land taxes are capitalized
into lower values, and thereby supplant interest costs rather than supplement
Mason Gaffney                                                               141


them, as already noted. The reason that land taxes hasten ripening is that
ripening land is mostly held by strong hands whose comparative advantage
lies in holding assets where the main cost is paying interest on loans and
forgoing interest on equity. Hastening the ripening of such land is simply an
aspect of the transfer from rich to poor that land taxation effects via differen-
tial capitalization (see Appendix, section I).
    Frequently the date of ripeness is outside the owner's direct control and
depends on when public works are extended. Today, in many suburban areas,
sewers are controlling. Here, land taxes cannot speed ripening until sewers are
built. But they can then speed private building to match public building and
effect great savings on public capital of all kinds.
    Land taxes also have important distributive effects. Future sewers have a
present value to landowners. Values rise above farm levels —not once and for
all, but incrementally along a line wiggling around a basic compound interest
growth curve. This annual accrual of value is a current income, in the true
economic sense, just as depreciation is a current cost. Land taxes levied ad
valorem on the base of this selling value are a way of tapping this accruing
income for the public. Appreciation is proportional to value; the tax is pro-
portional to value; therefore the tax is proportional to the appreciation.
    Arguments against taxing appreciating land do not therefore hold water on
the grounds on which they are usually presented — i.e., that ripening land
yields no income. They do, however, make sense to the local interests whose
welfare is the bottom line of the municipal enterprise. Land taxes redistribute
income from landowners to other voters and immigrants. From the parochial
Mercantilist view this is bad. From the national view, where the welfare of
migrants and labor are a greater concern, it might be valued more positively.
   It is traditional to blame premature building and sprawl on ad valorem
assessment of ripening land. Premature extension of public works is more
guilty, coupled with postmature conversion of ripe land close-in, made unripe
or submarginal by taxes on building.
   Aside from wealth effects, land taxes are neutral in their effect on date of
conversion, so long as they are not contingent on the date selected. Noncon-
tingency is the same principle that makes land taxes neutral towards other
land use choices. Suppose someone were panicked by rising land taxes into
premature urbanization of farmland, as is sometimes feared. What would he
gain? Either he would overimprove and lose money the first few years; or he
would gauge his building to the slim early market, and in a few years be
locked into an underimprovement while his land assessment and taxes kept
on rising.
  If he behaves rationally he will not convert land sooner because of tax
carrying costs. The time permanently to convert land use, with or without
142                                                Tax Reform to Release Land


taxes, is when the rapid rise of value begins to taper off. Then the land is ripe.
This happens when the city has grown out to abut the land in question. Land
taxes should tend to help conversion be less disorderly than now by equaliz-
ing carrying costs among owners of different credit ratings. Land assessments
should also be given a quantum jump when public works are supplied, trigger-
ing action, prompting owners to fill in compactly and developers to sell
quickly, lest the public investment in the works be sterile.
  Land taxes would encourage premature conversion if the assessor malad-
ministered them, i.e., if he raised them until the owner improved the land,
then locked the assessment at that level. Under that system, the owner could
buy himself a low assessment by early underdevelopment. Some assessors do
maladminister like that. The solution is the building-residual method of as-
sessment: assess the land at what it would bring if vacant; then assign the
building the residual value.

Aggregate Local Effect of Property Taxes on Supply of Buildings
  Building taxes. The overall effect of taxing buildings is to reduce the
service flow from a municipality of given area. We have seen this in several
aspects.
    Intensity falls, in terms of quality, durability, and height especially. There
is some compensatory tendency toward increasing lot coverage, the strength
of it depending on whether people have somewhere else to go. If they do, lots
get larger as buildings ramble.
    Site renewal slows down greatly. This slowdown, coupled with less durable
buildings, creates slums and out-of-service land. Each old building robs neigh-
boring sites of their renewability, and the extreme result is nonrenewable,
abandoned neighborhoods.
   Building taxes magnify the motive to withhold land for ripening. The
virtue of avoiding premature commitment is distorted into the vice of post-
mature commitment. Within a neighborhood the delay can be indefinite, as
each separate owner, waiting for certainty, imposes uncertainty on others. In
the still larger scene of the entire metropolis, postmature building in truly
ripe areas disperses demand outwards. Development takes place in outer areas
that are made to look ripe from a local viewpoint, even after taxes, but are
grossly premature in the regional plan. This is the more likely when central
city tax rates become substantially higher than suburban.
   Taxing buildings tends to favor larger parcels and discourage subdivision
and apartments.
   Last, taxing buildings weakens the relative bidding power of more inten-
sive uses in competing for land, and changes the structure of cities. Gas
Mason Gaffney                                                              143


stations and parking lots push high buildings out of the center. Out-of-service
lands break up complementary clusters, and cause urban sprawl.
   The combined effect is to reduce the service from any given amount of
land and to diffuse demand over a wider area than is necessary, economical,
or socially desirable. This result is a kind of forced consumption of land, plus
forced consumption of capital, as sprawl inflates the infrastructure costs of
urbanization. This heavy capital cost dashes the hope that moving out to
cheap land in the old frontier tradition may open up land for housing the
mass market.
   Land taxes. The overall effect of taxing land is toward equalizing the
intensity of use between rich and poor by displacing regressive interest costs
with the tax. That means intensifying the use of land, because most land is
held by the rich; but it means more land per family for most families, be-
cause the median family is far below the mean in income and even lower
in wealth.
   Taxing land is redistributive, the more so when the proceeds go to finance
schools and welfare. So long as localities were infected with a wish to grow,
and an egalitarian philosophy, land taxes found strong support. In today's
mood of local Mercantilism, which questions growth and leans to elitism
while still seeking local efficiency and community, tension and ambivalence
surround the local taxation of land.


                  EFFICIENCY, EQUITY, AND POLICY

   Policies of forced consumption of land and capital achieve their ends at
high cost in social efficiency. They reduce density below what sovereign
consumers evidently desire, running up heavy public costs in the process.
They retard renewal and create slums. They frustrate the mass market desire
for cheap land and cheap housing.
   They make cities disintegrate in several ways. Building taxes weaken the
relative power of intensive uses to compete for the most accessible land.
Underemphasis on land taxes, as by underassessment and zoning dodges,
causes the most rentable land to go to the strongest hands with superior
financial power, rather than to the most productive use. A weak seller far out
often looks better to a builder than a strong holdout close in. Zoning as we
practice it is self-defeating, because a builder's biggest profit comes from
breaking the zoning rather than following the rules and paying a high price
for land already zoned to his needs. Long extension of the ripening period
creates too many niches for shoddy interim uses that disfigure the American
city.
144                                                Tax Reform to Release Land


   The policies force consumption of more land and capital than consumers
want. And they inhibit adequate development of mass systems like transit
and sewerage that depend on high density.
   The set of policies also militates against social equity and sense of commu-
nity. They are consistently biased against the poor and school-age children
and their parents, contributing to class division and the generation gap. They
are biased against people, contributing to the unemployment problem that
federal policy alone has now proven powerless to abate. If Tawney was right
that a society is rich when material goods are cheap and human beings dear,
then these policies work to impoverish society. They treat people as a pol-
lutant.
   Remedial policy can be at once radical and conservative. It needs to be
radical in the sense of being pervasive and transcendent. That is, we need
policies that will change local incentives and nudge local decisions in the
humanist direction, as opposed to a series of running battles forcing local
officials to go against what they perceive to be their interest.
   Policy can be conservative in the sense that small changes can tip the
balance between exclusionary and philanthropic policies. Cities have powerful
incentives to attract people, as well as to resist them. The two large forces are
about evenly balanced. It was not long ago, after all, that the growth booster
was an American stereotype. Heaven protect us from his most barbaric mani-
festations, but he does display a set of motives for welcoming immigrants.
What is needed now is to tip the scales of local incentive in favor of receiving
human immigrants, as opposed to exclusive emphasis on capturing capital,
public works, and territory.
   Policy can also be conservative in retaining local control over local matters.
There is great administrative efficiency in having each local government
handle as much as possible, motivated towards efficiency by having its own
bottom line to maximize. It is not important that the profit or equity be
large. It is important that profit vary with, reward, and motivate local ef-
ficiency.
   It would not work to withdraw local zoning power. Zoning and other
exclusionary devices are means to ration access to local public schools, and in
lesser measure to parks, streets, and other common properties. To take away
the LG's exclusionary powers would cause them to starve the teachers and
sell the parks for commerce. They would not pay for good schools if these
simply attracted more large, poor families to share the schools and dilute the
tax base. Fighting the good fight against snob zoning will boomerang on the
warriors if it results in lowering school support. The object after all is not just
access to land for housing, but also to good schools. The object is not just to
equalize school access, but to improve schools.
Mason Gaffney                                                               145


   The most important feasible radical-conservative policy change to achieve
these goals today is to shift "foundation" school financing to the state level,
and the property tax along with it. A year ago that was far out. Suddenly it is
imminent and probable.
   School children entering a community complete with a generous voucher
for tuition, social dividend, or other device for allocating state funds by
school population would be a local fiscal asset. LGs would compete to attract
them. It would become financially respectable to be a human being.
   Much else would then fall into place as a result of voluntary local action.
And the property tax itself, as a state institution, could be remodified: all the
exclusionary features that characterize local assessment practice could be
changed. The site value tax with exemption of buildings would make more
sense than it does now from the local viewpoint. And rates could be much
higher than now, with less fear of repelling fiscal surplus generators. Property
could carry more of the tax burden, lightening the load on regressive sales and
payroll taxes.
   A concurrent change should be a higher emphasis on user charges gauged
to social cost. Exclusionary policies now are an indirect device to ration use
of local commons. They are very inefficient devices with more side effects
than effects, and readily perverted to antisocial goals as we have seen. If we
don't like autos we should tax autos, not houses.
   User charges today are perverse. We tax water supply and exempt private
wells, tax sewer use and exempt septic tanks, tax mass transit and exempt
autos and streets, and so on. Within mass systems, rate regulation makes rich
territory (which houses poor people) subsidize lean territory and rich people.
All this needs to be worked over, on marginal cost principles. The effect on
land use would be a conservative, economical, accountant-directed humani-
tarian revolution.
   Changes in federal tax policy are also needed. Congress needs to take the
fun out of land speculation by hitting capital gains in a dozen ways, thus
encouraging cities to use their capital budgets to serve their median citizens
rather than the strong hands who hold speculative land and inveigle council-
men. Washington might also share the social dividend of school finance, rais-
ing the revenue by kinds of tax reform that encourage better land use.
   Cities could expand with sharp edges, coordinating zoning and tax assess-
ment with extension of municipal services, developing close-in land com-
pactly for median citizens, letting the wealthy average-raisers outside pay
their own way.
   Congress needs to stop the competitive underassessment of land by local
assessors, described above, which makes a mockery of the federal income tax
by letting people avoid taxes by depreciating land not just once, which
146                                               Tax Reform to Release Land


amounts to complete exemption of land income, but several times, which
amounts to a large subsidy for holding title to land. There is no substitute for
federal review of assessments — a federal board of equalization, in effect.
Otherwise, local assessors will continue overvaluing buildings relative to land
to inflate the depreciable share of real estate owned by their local consti-
tuents.
   These economic policy suggestions do not displace the legal steps discussed
by others here, but supplement them in our mutual quest for the lost sense of
American community and purpose. These are exciting times, and there wifi be
much excitement in implementing and detailing the policy shifts sketched
above. Nobody said it was going to be easy.


                                  APPENDIX

L Differential Capitalization of Taxes on Land Value
Let a = annual net income of land before land tax (but after other taxes)
      i = rate of interest
      t = rate of yearly property tax on land value
  V = market value of land = assessed value of land.
Witht = 0

(1)                                 V=.
This is simple "capitalization" of income into value.
     With t > 0
                                    = a — tV


                                V(i + t) = a,

(2)                               V=..
Equation (2) is the classic algebra of tax capitalization: the tax is capitalized
into a lower value.
     Now assume that credit rationing divides the capital market into two
groups, Poor and Rich, who pay (or forgo) two different interest rates, p and
r.
Mason Gaffney                                                                147


(3)                                 p>r.
Equation (2) now tells us what each group can bid for land, using p or r in
place of i. This is diffential capitalization. Rich outbids Poor for land yielding
each the same net income (a), and even for land yielding Poor more income,
up to:

(4)                             _>p+t.
                                   r+t
                                     —



  But taxes (t) lower the bids of Rich more than bids of Poor. Bids of the
Poor are cut in half when t = p, but bids of the Rich are cut in half at the
lower t = r. More generally, equation (4) says that raising t dilutes the effect
of p being higher than r, tending to equalize bidding power of Rich and Poor.
   I have simplified by omitting that the lower bidder must figure on taxes on
a value established by the higher bidder, but the simplification merely under-
states without changing the conclusion.
   To restate in terms of yearly carrying costs, c,

(5)                             c= V(i+ t).
The poor pay more to carry a given piece of land, because the cost is mostly
interest. Again I understate by simplifying. The poor not only pay higher
rates, they borrow on shorter terms, so their carrying costs include a heavier
amortization factor as well. The self-fmanced landowner has no debt to
amortize, and no cash drain but taxes.
      But as t is made larger, V falls, so Vi falls, and the impartial tax cost
displaces the regressive interest cost.
   The effect of the tax is greater when land is appreciating. Let V rise yearly
by g, a percentage. Deduct this from c (we could instead have added it to
income). Now

(6)                          c V(i—g+ t).
(6) shows that g leverages or fortifies the effect of p being greater than r, in
contrast to t which dilutes the effect.
    Thus appreciating land gravitates to "strong hands," i.e., those who borrow
at the prime rate, or don't have to borrow at all. And by the same token the
equalizing effect of land taxes is most pronounced when applied to appreciat-
ing land. A numerical example based on (6), when p = 0.08 and r           0.05,
follows.
148                                                  Tax Reform to Release Land


                 Ratio of Carrying Costs        —
                                                —
                                                    0.08   g+t
                                           Cr       0.05 — g + t

                                  0        0.02      0.04
                     t\\g
                      0         8/5       6/3        4/1
                      0.02     10/7       8/5        6/3
                      0.04     12/9      10/7        8/5
                      0.06     14/11     12/9       10/7
                      0.08     16/13     14/11      12/9
                      0.10     18/15     16/13      14/11


II. Why Land Generally Ripens into a Lower Intensity
Let C = capital cost of building
      R = present value of future net revenues or cash flow from building
      S = usevalue of site = R — C
        =
            c s = cost/benefit ratio (C/R).
    1. There is a hierarchy of land uses, qualitatively different. While each one
is of variable intensity, they are discrete, with a quantum jump from one step
to the next, as from grazing to row crops, row crops to orchards, acreage to
lots, singles to walk-ups, walk-ups to high-rise, and so on.
    Demand is generally rising, and land succeeds from one generation of use
to another. Each use has an inner margin where it is the lower use, less
intensive than its inner rival; and an outer margin where demand is weaker, or
land is less suited, and it is the higher use, more intensive than its outer rival.
    "Marginal" land connotes low intensity, but the connotation is misleading.
It is based on a physical or per acre concept, while economics is concerned
with values. The essence of economic marginality is that C/R -÷ 1, the cost/
benefit ratio approaches unity. In these terms, marginal land is the most
intensively used. As demand rises and costs fall, land yields a surplus. As the
rings in the hierarchy of land uses expand, and a site shifts from the outer to
the inner margin of its ring, it becomes less marginal and more rentable, and
C/R falls.
    2. Land ripens because of falling building costs as well as increasing de-
mand. Obsolescence is a continuing expectation, an ineluctable factor in all
decisions (independent of inflation and overstated fatalism about union wage
rates, not at issue here). Of course, falling C means lower C/R.
Mason Gaffney                                                                  149


   Another general reason to expect falling C is economy of scale. As demand
grows, a larger building is appropriate. There are great economies of scale in
building.
   Land can also ripen into a new generation of use at lower density. A
quarter or more of many central business districts has ripened into parking
lots, for example, and many a house has been knocked down to expand a gas
station apron.
   Another kind of falling cost generally to be expected is lower borrowing
rates of interest. This results from better creditworthiness of land as the
proposed use becomes less marginal, innovative, or experimental in an area.
As the land ripens into a better credit rating, R rises because it is the dis-
counted value of future revenues, and a lower discount rate is relevant.
   This last factor is partly circular, but that is the nature of credit ratings. It
depends on the cumulative process of forming conventional opinion among
lenders, few of whom supply much venture capital.
   3. Empirical studies generally show that C/R is lower on better lands. It is
very low in Champaign County, Illinois, or Benton County, Indiana, the best
grain land. It is very low in Kuwait, the best oil land. It is quite low in
Manhattan, the best urban land; generally lower on retail land than residen-
tial; lower in central cities than fringes; lower in rich suburbs than poor ones.
It is lower for Site I timber lands on the western slope of the Coast Range in
Oregon than for Site VI lands in the high Cascades. To some extent that may
reflect underutilization of better land due to cartel behavior, the soporific
effect of surplus income on owners, and other institutional factors, but it
probably is more basic than that — basic as that is!
    4. Time generally brings public works, paid by others, to lower costs. This
is one factor in increasing demand, already postulated, but it is also a factor
in lower costs. Thus extension of city sewer and water precludes septic tank
and well.
    Figure 1 is a schematic representation of these relationships.

III. Effects of Building Tax on Intensity and Ripeness Combined
  in equations (7) and (8) in the text, I proceeded for simplicity as though C
and R in each year would be the same despite the threat of building taxes.
Actually, the landowner would turn to less-intensive alternatives so C/R
would fall. This would almost certainly entail an absolute decline in both, as
well.
  Thus, consider all cases where

(1)                            C(l + T)/R> 1.
150                                                     Tax Reform to Release Land


That means

(2)                             R — C(l + T) < 0.

i.e., the use value is negative, taxes have made the particular use of land
submarginal. But they have not made the land itself submarginal. The owner
can find a lower use whose

(3)                               C(l + T)/R < I.
  Now posit a base intensity-path, without taxes, following the course
charted in Appendix H, with C/R falling; apply building taxes, and let the

Dollars
per acre




                                                                       To better land >


                                                                        Higher uses moving
                                                                    \\\onto_poorer land




Percent I
    100

      80
      60
      40
      20
       0
            1st generation   2nd generation    3rd generation
              (estates)       (subdivisions)    (apartments)
Figure 1. Costs, revenues, use values of sites, and intensities (or cost-benefit ratios),
comparing succeeding discrete generations of uses as land ripens into higher uses.
Mason Gaffney                                                                 151


taxpayer change his path, to avoid taxes optimally. He will lower dR where
it is highest, i.e., at the beginning of the path. Thus C/R will be lower at the
start and will drop less along the path. This, in turn, reduces the high after-tax
growth rate of S, and reduces the retarding effect on ripening.
   The net effect of all this is a combination of two evasive wiggles. In
general, he builds less, later. The emphasis depends on particulars. He may
build much less and a little later; or a little less much later; or any combina-
tion.
