Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

100
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Europe's fatal affair
with VAT

Mason Gaffney

As austerity drives Europe deeper into insolvency and loss of competitiveness, the
political crisis is coming to a head. Economic stagnation is inextricably associated
with the way governments raise revenue. One of the European Union’ policies,

the Value Added Tax, has inflicted a pernicious and persistent cost on 500
million Europeans. For as the VAT tax-take grew, banks and public exchequers
grew mutually dependent, together building a house of cards based on future tax
revenues — revenues that VAT does not and cannot provide, even as it chokes off
productive commerce and industry and employment opportunities.

In 2014, the 28 members of the European Union used VAT to collect €975,900
million (equal to 7% of GDP). By the time the people of the United Kingdom
voted in their Brexit referendum in June 2016, the tax-take was about €1 trillion.

This means that the losses stemming from VAT alone were €1 trillion: that is the
sum on top of what was collected. It is the measure of what the nations of Europe
could have produced and enjoyed if, instead, their governments had employed the
one revenue raiser that does not distort economic behaviour. And yet, economists

fail to highlight these distortions as breaches in the dikes guarding Europe from its
encroaching sea of troubles.

As a customs union, the EU imposes tariffs which inflict further losses of
wealth and welfare. Tariffs, like all taxes based on transactions in the marketplace
(‘taxable events”) have effects similar to VAT, mutatis mutandis.

The excess burden of taxation is a worldwide problem. An ideological collective
of economic scholars and statesmen stands idly by while the defences around their
communities are systematically eroded. Worse, many rationalize and endorse
VAT, supported by the cartel of international agencies and banks that promote
‘harmony in taxing, lending and collecting. Contrary to the stridently expressed
views of libertarian commentators, Europe has not reached the limit of its taxable
capacity; rather, it needs a better fiscal system and philosophy, with higher tax rates
on narrower and less elastic and less dynamic revenue bases.

101
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

102
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

1

What's the matter
with sales taxation?

N AUGUST 2011 S&P Global Ratings lowered the credit rating of the

U.S. Treasury. We held our breath, thinking this might be the tipping point
before a flight from the dollar. Our Congress, deadlocked, quarrelsome and
dysfunctional, seemed to deserve it. And yet mobile international capital saw
something, spited S&P, and stayed with US Treasury securities. It seems that we
must be doing something right, or at least less wrong than other nations. I would
not breast-beat about “American Exceptionalism.” I deplore our nation’s faults,
and failure to face them and reform them. I deplore it when some primitive calls
it unpatriotic to spotlight our faults: how else can we see and cure them? At the
same time it is foolish to preach that we must emulate Europe, when Europe is
sliding downhill faster than we, and floundering as it slides.

I build a thesis around a simple, if partial answer: the USA is the only major
nation lacking a national-level sales tax (or VAT or GST). At the same time we
raise a higher fraction of our combined national, state and local revenues from
taxes on property, and income from property, and from bequests of property.
The fraction is not justa little higher, but plain to see even without the microscopes
of modern theory and econometrics. True, our fraction of revenues raised from
property has been trending downwards for half a century, but even so is still many
times higher than in Europe, or in most nations of the world.

A major talking point among corporate spokesmen is to contrast the U.S.
nominal corporate tax rate with those of other nations, which have recently
become lower. Therefore, they say, we must lower ours, to make us “competitive”
(today’s buzzword). They give the impression that the income tax base is gross
income. I will show below that any income tax, personal or corporate, is less
depressive, and has less excess burden, than any sales or excise tax or VAT,
however “general.” That is partly because labour costs are deductible from
taxable income. In addition, earlier economists like Musgrave and Domar and
Commons and many others showed that deducting capital outlays may lower
the effective income tax rate on investing in new capital goods, often to zero
and even below. As Anne-Robert Jacques Turgot, an outstanding public servant,

103
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

economic philosopher and social reformer wrote, even longer ago, investing is
“the beneficial and fruitful circulation that animates all the work of society...”

It is true that nominal corporate income-tax rates in the USA have moved
recently to the #1 rank among major OPEC nations. That is not, however,
because our rates have risen; rather, others have fallen. Italy’s rate, for example,
has dropped from 52% in 1962 to 27% in 2012, a huge fall of 48%, while Italy
replaced the revenues by raising its VAT. If Italy had prospered, it might prove
the point urged by corporate lobbyists. However the well-known fact is that Italy
has fallen to beggar status in the EU. It is the biggest beggar among the failing
“PIIGS” nations.' This is the more remarkable considering that European VATs
generally are of the “consumption type” that lets one expense investments.

Today, U.S. economists and politicians of left and right are moving toward
a pessimal consensus: lowering tax rates on business and rentier incomes is
acceptable so long as Congress also closes “loopholes.” Hardly anyone says
what loopholes, hiding the vital truth that many loopholes, like fast write-off
and expensing of investing in creating new capital goods — genuinely “income-
creating” spending — are exactly what have made high rates of income taxation
tolerable, and compatible with high rates of investing during the mid-20th
Century.

Europe generally uses the “consumption-type VAT,” meaning that capital
outlays are expensible. This may have the effect of exempting the income of
capital from the tax, although it is hard to find a comprehensible definition of
“capital,” and if it includes land it is extremely discriminatory, and in any case
favours more durable over less durable capital, and fixed over circulating capital.
This, which should be a major issue, is untouched, to my knowledge, in the
literature — but will be touched herein.

James Buchanan has enjoyed great success with his new school of “Public
Choice,” appearing in many texts as the trunk of a new, alternative economics.

‘The Public Choice school argues that the best
tax is one with the most excess burden. That is
because the excess burden will dissuade voters
from supporting any taxes at all.’

One of its tenets, turning previous thinking upside down, is that the best tax is
one with the most excess burden. That is because the excess burden will dissuade
voters from supporting any taxes at all, and thus shrink government down to

1 PIIGS = Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain. While these are mostly Mediterranean, we will see that many
Baltic and central continental nations are nearly as troubled.

104
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

where it can be “drowned in a bathtub,” in Grover Norquist’s metaphor. Many
deeply- funded new think-tanks undergird dozens of well-paid economists to
orate on the same text.

Europe’s recent history seems to refute Buchanan’s thesis. Europe’s welfare
states, or most of them, fast outgrow Norquist’s little bathtubs, even though
financed by growing VATs with their excess burdens. VAT champions uphold
it because of what they see as its high capacity to raise revenue, and yet Europe’s
revenues keep falling as its nations substitute VATs more and more for narrower-
based income taxes.

John Stuart Mill in 1848, citing an even earlier finding by John McCullough,
showed that a seemingly “general” sales tax would tax capital for turning over,
and thus induce investors to favour those capital goods that turn over slowly.
In Austrian terms, the tax induces investors to lengthen the Austrian “period of
production,” and thus distort the “structure of capital” in favour of “high order”
capital goods. In Austrian cycle theory, this is a cardinal sin of public policy.

Modern Austrian writers, however, almost to a man, blame the problem
entirely on low interest rates enabled by misguided central bankers. Something is
missing there, and that something is tax policy.

Here is Mill’s proto-Austrian case against a general sales tax:

‘...if there were a tax on all commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, there
would ...as Mr. M’Culloch has pointed out, be a ‘disturbance’ of values ...owing to
..the different durability of the capital employed in different occupations ...in two
different occupations ...if a greater proportion of one than of the other is fixed
capital, or if that fixed capital is more durable, there will be a less consumption
of capital in the year, and less will be required to replace it, so that the profit, if
absolutely the same, will form a greater proportion of the annual returns.

To derive from a capital of £1,000 a profit of £100, the one producer may have to
sell produce to the value of £1,100, the other only to the value of £500. [i.e., where
capital is less durable, you must sell more gross to get the same net profit.]

‘If on these two branches of industry a tax be imposed ...the one commodity
must rise in price, or the other must fall, or both: commodities made chiefly by
immediate labour must rise in value, as compared with those which are chiefly
made by machinery... ?

How memorable is Mill’s word “disturbance,” 150 years before Darth Vader in
Star Wars sensed a “Disturbance in The Force.” In Mill’s and M’Culloch’s usage,
“The Force” is value as determined in a market before or without taxes based on
gross sales.

What Mill means by “capital” is clear from his insightful saying, “Capital is kept
in existence from age to age not by preservation but by continual reproduction”.
Mill’s “capital” then obviously does not include land. Capital is not a specific
concrete good, like a chair in the furniture shop. Rather, it is a quantum of value

2 1848, Book V, Chapter IV, pp. 504-05.
3 1848, Book |, Chapter V, para. 18.

105
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

that we can, and normally do, keep existing by using the cash from sales to “meet
the next payroll,” as they say, to replace the chair. It need not be an identical
chair, or any chair at all, for capital in this transition is totally fungible in form
and location.

Mill hid this light under a bushel, by offering just one example of a small
difference, arithmetic only. Tt was easy to overlook in passing, which is what later
standard-brand economists have done. Austrian-School writers, who should see
Mill’s point so clearly, have mostly skirted tax policy. We should, rather, set this
light in a tower on a hilltop as a beacon sending its gleam across the wave to save
the foundering ship of state. This paper therefore returns to it below, as a prime
example of the excess burden of any kind of sales tax, including VAT.

Then there is The Ramsey Rule. Most standard textbooks and learned papers
tell us that a truly general retail sales tax, unlike an excise tax, is neutral as between
one commodity and another. A national tax is also neutral between locations, since
it is the same in one region as another. Those conditions are never approached in
practice, but in the sales-tax canon that merely means reformers should extend
the reach of the tax, as the EU does with its push for tax “harmonization” among
member nations, meaning in practice that all should follow-the-leader and adopt
a VAT at about the same rate. Sales-taxers in the USA keep pushing for ways to
override the Commerce Clause in the U.S. Constitution and allow each state to
tax imports from other states.

Thus, Buchanan and Flowers wrote “If the tax is uniformly imposed on the
sale of all commodities and services, there can be no real shifting of resources
from taxed employments to non-taxed employments. The shift in relative prices
occasioned by the partial tax cannot occur under a truly general sales tax”.4 Even
Harry G. Brown, no fan of sales taxes, wrote “if there is a tax on the production
of all commodities and services...there is no advantage in leaving one taxed line
for another line which is taxed to the same extent.”® Earl Rolph and George Break
commit to this view.° So does Harold Somers, generalizing that a tax on gross
sales is the same as a tax on net income.’

Bernard Herber® and David Hyman? chime in cautiously. Charles McLure
throws out caution and boldly damns “...the ridiculously unfair and distortionary
de facto exemption of interstate sales...”1° |!

The Ramsey Rule says that sales tax rates, to be allocationally neutral, should
not be uniform at all, but inversely proportional to elasticities of supply and
demand. I have addressed this issue elsewhere,'* quoting A.C. Pigou:

4 Buchanan & Flowers (1975: 399).

5 Brown (1939: 254).

6 Rolph and Break (1949: 117.

7 Somers (1964: 17, 26, 27).

8 Herber (1967: 254).

9 Hyman (2005: 617-26).

10 McLure (2005).

11 Gaffney (2000 and 2000a) refutes this position.
12 Gaffney (2009: 52-53).

106
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

“If there is any commodity for which either the demand or the supply is absolutely
inelastic, the formula implies that the rate of tax imposed on every other commod-
ity must be nil, i.e. that the whole of the revenue wanted must be raised on that
commodity.”

Pigou’s reasoning leads straight as a guided missile to levying taxes exclusively
on the value of land, because its supply is inelastic. Whether Pigou knew what he
was saying we may never know, for he was guarded and cautious and indirect and
often obscure and coded, like so many academics fearful of witch-hunters. He
had reason to be concerned, since even today, long after his death, some are trying
to discredit his ideas by alleging he was a Soviet secret agent. His Chapter XIV,
“Taxes on the Public Value of Land,” does favour such taxes, but is more hedged.

Richard Musgrave avoids the issue by leaving Ramsey completely out of his
classic Theory of Public Finance. Many, indeed most modern academics square
the circle by first citing and then misquoting the Rule. They apply it only to
demand elasticities, omitting supply elasticities, even though these are the more
important part of the original rule. Allyn Young started this ball rolling in
reviewing Pigou in 1929: “I shall assume that costs are constant. It will be
unnecessary, therefore, to take account of elasticity of supply as something
apart from elasticity of demand.” The notable exception is Joseph Stiglitz.
Consistently, Stiglitz often writes sympathetically of taxing land values.'

Modern writers deplore the exemption of “services” from the sales tax base.
‘These writers and teachers refer in their contexts only to labour services, ignoring
the service flows of land or capital. This is not from ignorance: they know that the
“service-flow” of an owner’s home has long been included in the National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPA) as a form of income, income consumed by the
owner-occupant as the real estate yields it. They just blank that out when it comes
‘6 Then there is the well-nourished
doctrine that we should tax consumption in order to exempt saving. The writer

to taxing services to the “final” consumer.

has refuted this elsewhere,'” and will only summarize the arguments here.
Basically they are that circulating capital is the life-blood of an economy,
and there are four major vampires draining it away. These are
1. public debts
2. equity withdrawal from appreciated lands
3. preferential tax treatment of imputed incomes from durable capital

and lands, and

4. the corporation.

13 Pigou (1928: 105).

14 Young (1929: 15).

15 Stiglitz (2010).

16 Anderson (1913: 252).
17 Gaffney (2009).

107
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

2

Origins of American
exceptionalism

EFORE THE ENLIGHTENMENT, and the Ages of Reason and Benevolent

Despotism, Europe raised major revenues from excise taxes like the hated
salt tax (gabelle), and tariffs, and tolls (like those exacted by the original Robber
Barons straddling the Rhine). It built roads with drafted corvée and robot labour.
In England, Thomas Hobbes, a leading influence on the Stuart line of monarchs,
had pushed hard for taxes on what he called “consumption” (meaning in practice
the products and commerce of the bourgeoisie).'* Slavery, serfdom, peonage,
and indentured labour were common. Prison labour and the galleys were not
unknown, and lingered into the 19th Century, as dramatized in Les Misérables.
Underpaid Religious staffed schools and hospitals, hospices and asylums.
As recently as 1930 England used a salt tax as a tool of its imperialism in India,
and beat down Gandhi's passively resisting Indians with extreme cruelty that
became notorious worldwide. At the same time it was forcing native Africans
to labour like slaves by imposing poll taxes. Margaret Thatcher even tried to
re-import the poll tax into England itself, which was her downfall.

French King Louis XVI, briefly playing the benevolent despot, in 1774
appointed Turgot his Finance Minister. Turgot was fresh from his triumphs as
Intendant of The Limousin (Limoges), where he had converted a stagnant into a
thriving province. The Parlement de Paris, composed of the First Estate (clergy)
and the Second Estate (nobles) articulated dominant attitudes in its Rémonstrance
to Turgot’s Six Edicts of 1774.

‘The personal responsibility of the clergy is to fulfil all the functions relating to edu-
cation and religion and to aid the unfortunate through alms. The noble devotes his
life to the defence of the state and assists the sovereign by providing council. The

last class of the nation, which cannot render such distinguished service to the state,
fulfils its obligation through taxes, industry and physical labour...’

The Physiocrats wrote and preached, and Turgot the statesman acted for
un-taxing commerce and industry and labour, raising revenues from land

18 Neither Hobbes nor any later sales-taxer, to my knowledge, has ever defined “consumption” to mean anything but
trade in “personal” (movable) property, excluding real estate.

108
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

taxation, and coining the slogan laissez faire for their philosophy, which gradually
advanced throughout Europe. They schooled both Adam Smith and many of the
American “Founding Fathers” in their thinking. Obviously, “liberal” then meant
something drastically different from “neo-liberal” today.

The students, in practice, got ahead of their teachers. Adam Smith asked why
Spain, jump- started with gold pilfered from the New World, lagged in economic
progress. He laid it on the Spanish alcabala and cientos.'° These were heavy sales
taxes, their nominal rates magnified by cascading, that spared the grandees from
taxes on their lands while stifling Spanish commerce and industry.” They were
“broad-based,” which modern sales-taxers tout as raising more revenues, but
under Philip II with his broad-based alcavala and cientos, Spain declared national
bankruptcy three times.

People today associate Adam Smith with international free trade, but Smith
actually contains many passages favouring domestic free trade even more than
international trade. Here is one wherein he contrasts Great Britain with Spain
and France, noting that the interior commerce of G.B. is relatively tax free.”!

‘This freedom of interior commerce ...is perhaps one of the principle causes of the

prosperity of Great Britain, every great country being necessarily the best and most
extensive market for the greater part of the productions of its own industry.” 7

Today, neo-liberals tout “trade” as a basic social good, but they mean just
international trade. Look up “commerce” in The New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics: it says “see International Trade.” States and cities speak of their export
industries as their “economic base,” ignoring the findings of Jane Jacobs and others
about the virtues of import substitution as key to economic development. Neo-
liberal free traders like Charles McLure lead the charge to override the Commerce
Clause of the U.S. Constitution and allow each American State to tax imports, to
help them raise their State sales taxes. “Neo-” pundits hijack old words to mean
the opposite of their originals.

In the new USA after 1789 the Federalists under Hamilton first took control,
and began levying excise taxes. In 1794 farmers of western Pennsylvania rebelled
against a tax on their maize, which they marketed as whisky to cut down on
transportation costs. Hamilton, with his Napoleonic ambitions, led Federal troops
to put down this uprising. The voters, when they found him dominating the
subsequent cabinet of John Adams,” and leading the country into the depression
of 1798, retired his party and installed Jefferson, whose Virginia dynasty shaped
the nation for the next 36 years.”

19 Smith (1776: 850-51); Groves (1946: 307, n.14).

20 Klein (1920).

21 “Relatively” is a necessary word. Godwin the idealist 20 years later deplored the growth of taxes on “consumption”
(read retail trade). The glass that Smith saw as half full, Godwin saw as half empty.

22 Smith, Wealth of Nations (1776: 851-52).

23 Hamilton was not a formal member of Adams’ Cabinet, but dominated it anyway.

24 President J.Q. Adams, 1825-29, had left the Federalists in 1807, supported Madison for President, and been Mon-
roe’s Sec. of State. Jackson and Polk were Tennesseans who led Jefferson's old Party against the Whigs.

109
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

These Virginians knew their Physiocracy. Jefferson, Madison and Monroe had
all represented the colonies or the USA in Paris, as had their friend Franklin,
where they hobnobbed with philosophers and picked up their ideas.?> They were
pro-French, even as France shifted from monarchy to Directory to Empire to The
Bourgeois King Louis Philippe, 1832-48. It was Monroe who had led the fight
for the Commerce Clause, freeing internal trade from excise taxes;”° Jefferson who
wrote the Northwest Ordinance dividing public lands for privatization in small
parcels, and bought Louisiana, and brought the Physiocrats Gallatin and DuPont
into his circle, and welcomed Tom Paine back from France, and extended easy
credit to small buyers of western lands. It was Madison, with all his faults, who
masterminded the Constitution, and then, in the War of 1812, used the Federal
power to tax property, a power he had so carefully circumscribed.”” They got the
new nation off to a flying start.

The Confederate states, even though fighting to survive, stood on their
states’ rights against their own C.S.A. government, and bucked an attempted
C.S.A. property tax.?8 Jefferson Davis had to finance secession with excise taxes.
So Davis put a 10% tax on all farm production, paid in kind — a crushing
burden on marginal farmers. Winn Parish, LA, for example, home of Huey
Long, in 1863 petitioned General Grant to save them from this “oppression”.”
The C.S.A. repudiated its bonds and currency, and lost the war catastrophically.
Following attempted Reconstruction, however, came Hayes, Reunion and
Restoration of the old ruling class which ever since, first as Democrats and now
as Republicans, has saddled the old Confederate States with the most regressive
tax systems in the nation, featuring heavy reliance on sales taxes.

Through the complex turmoil of 19th century Europe the bourgeoisie joined
the first two estates in the ruling class. In the transition, Louis Philippe of France,
reigning between the revolts of 1830 and 1848, earned the title of “the bourgeois
king,” indicating he did not view commerce and industry simply as geese to be
plucked, as in the overworked phrase from Louis XIV’S finance minister Colbert.
“The sales tax existed ...intermittently, in various European countries to about
1800, but in the 19th century it played no part in the fiscal development of
the important nations”.* Rulers in several nations, including the USA, fostered
la petite propriété (in Russia, “kulaks’?') as a political buffer for /a grande
propriété. (In Germany, Grossgrundeigentum.) Tax regimes evolved with shifting
class voting power, in a complex history with details beyond the scope here.*”

25 Bigelow (1868: IV:195); Van Doren (1938: 372); Foner (1948: 15, 24-39).

26 Norton (1941: 51).

27 Medina (1960).

28 Foner (1988: 15).

29 Brinkley (1982: 11); T. Harry Williams (1969: xii).

30 Shoup and Haimoff (1934: 811); National Industrial Conference Board (1929: 163-66).

31 Originally “kulak" meant any peasant more acquisitive than average, following the Stolypin reforms. During the
liquidation phase under Stalin it evolved to mean almost any peasant who opposed collectivization.

32 Wikipedia's anonymous article on Turgot cites many sources on his being followed by many of the best-known
economists of the 19th Century.

110
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

By the end of World War 2, tax structures in Europe were a mélange, short of
anything ideal but not as regressive as under ancien régime. We will pick up the
story later in 1954, when the first VAT began the march back to the fiscal ideals

of Le Rémonstrance.

Taxation in the colonies

American colonies had little need of taxes, by modern standards. There was no
national government to support. French and Indian wars were a major expense,
but Imperial Britain paid for much of that to fend off their French rivals. Armed
settlers and hunters and vigilantes dealt with most kinds of local crime; volun-
teers fought fires. Church and extended families covered much of what today
we call social welfare and education, such as they were. Companies chartered in
England sought dividends in various ways, as from road tolls and by selling off or
renting out lands granted them by the Crown. Plymouth Plantation meted out
lands to each settler, “and him that had a better (location) allowed something to
%3 _ that is, in their crude way, they
taxed land ad valorem, as many migrants did as they moved west.

him that had a worse, as ye valuation wente”

Nationwide, when George III’s treasury sought to charge the colonies for
providing their common defence it was by an excise tax like that on tea. The new
nation was born in revolt against The East India Company’s monopoly and these
kinds of taxes that accompanied it. Tax revolt and trust-busting were built into
our very DNA, at birth.

Many of America’s “Founding Fathers” visited France as diplomats, and learned
from Turgot. Some noted American visitors included Franklin, Jefferson, Paine,
Madison, Monroe, Adams, and others. America’s revolution against England
meant friendship with France and Frenchmen, including liberals like La Fayette,
du Pont, and Gallatin. Turgot tried but failed to reform France in his day, but
he was one of our Founding Fathers, in the mind. The Commerce Clause of the
U.S. Constitution did for the new USA what Turgot had tried to do for France,
it guaranteed free trade among the states.

Turgot first made his mark as Royally-appointed Intendant of Limoges (1761-
74). There he abolished the mandatory corvée (roadwork in lieu of taxation). He
improved roads by other means, like taxing the lands they served. He encouraged

33 “Then they agreed that every person or share should have 20 acers of land devided unto them ... and they (who
were) appoynted were to begin first on ye one side of ye towne, & how farr to goe; and then on ye other side in like
manner; and so to devid it by lotte; and appointed sundrie by name to doe it, and tyed them to certainrruls to pro-
ceed by; as that they should only lay out settable or tillable land, at least such of it as should butt on ye water side
..and pass by ye reste as refuse or comune ...And they were first to agree of ye goodnes and fitnes of it before ye lott
was drawne ...whose lottssoever should fall next ye towne ...or most convenint for nearness they should take to them
a neighbor or tow ...and should suffer them to plant corne with them for 4 years ...ye rest were valued and equalized
at an indifferent rate, and so every man kept his owne, and he that had a better allowed something to him that had a
worse, as ye valuation wente” (emphasis mine). Wm. Bradford, 1627, History of Plymouth Plantation, from the original
ms of Bradford's history Of Plimoth Plantation, Book II. Boston: Wright and Potter Printing Company, State Printers
(1898: 258-61).
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

the now-famous porcelain industry, so that Limoges-Turgot is now a block
phrase in that region of France. In 1774 the new King Louis XVI, impressed,
made Turgot Comptroller-General for all France. Turgot set about removing
interprovincial trade barriers, which he perceived as a major barrier to French
prosperity. He coined the term Laissez-faire.*4 He also set about reforming the
tax system, subjecting the previously exempt lands of the Ist and 2nd Estates?°
to forms of property taxation. This was in the spirit of the Age, the Age of
Benevolent Despotism and Enlightenment. Enlightenment included Science and
Philosophy, which included Physiocracy as taught by Quesnay at Versailles, and
practiced by Turgot.

‘Turgot abolished the mandatory corvée
(roadwork in lieu of taxation). He improved roads
by other means like taxing the lands they serve.’

While Intendant of Limoges he published his Reflexionssur la Formation et la
Distribution des Richesses (1766). This short, compact work contains much of
the essential wisdom that Adam Smith soon was to popularize and expand with
The Wealth of Nations (1776). Turgot stressed the important roles of capital, and
free markets. He favoured letting the market determine interest rates — not from
dogma, but from observing the results of John Law’s ruination of French banking
in 1720. He would combat poverty by relieving the poor of taxes, while raising
revenues from taxes on the value of land — including lands traditionally exempt or
under-taxed. He correctly observed that taxes based on land values are nearly the
only kind that raises revenues without intervening in free markets, twisting and
suppressing incentives to produce and invest. By “invest” he meant paying labour
to produce new capital, or replace old capital. He emphatically did not mean the
zero-sum casino games of buying land, or old capital, or trading shares in existing
companies. Smith visited France in 1766 and consulted extensively with Turgot,
a man whose practical turn of mind made him a congenial tutor for Smith.

The Commerce Clause, Turgot’s contribution to the U.S. Constitution, has
preserved interstate tax competition. It created and has preserved our domestic
market, the greatest free trade zone in the world, an essential ingredient
of American productivity and prosperity. Like Turgot, our Founding Fathers
aimed for domestic more than for international free trade. As the USA
expanded the “domestic” market swelled to include many times the land area its
founders dreamed of.

34 Laissez faire, laissez passer, le monde va de lui-méme. It is French for an ancient Chinese concept from Lao-tse, and
has now been hijacked and distorted by the very kinds of people Turgot meant to rebuke.
35 The Clergy and the Hereditary Aristocracy, respectively.

112
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Until 1933, domestic free trade also prevented states from using sales taxes to
raise revenue, for fear of interstate competition. It still tends to cap state sales tax
rates. That forced states back on the property tax, just as Turgot recommended for
France. Without it, it is likely that state sales taxes would rise to 20% or more in
short order, as the wholesome fear of interstate competition was stifled.*°

The U.S. Constitution was a product of The Age of Reason and Enlightenment.
Science flowered. Turgot, like Quesnay, admired the work of William Harvey on
how blood circulates, with flux and reflux. Turgot simply wrote that investing is
“the beneficial and fruitful circulation that animates all the work of society” —
thus capturing the basic idea of modern macro-economics, in simpler language
than used today.

‘America's Founding Fathers aimed for domestic
more than for international free trade.’

The U.S. did impose national excise taxes, emphasizing sumptuary ones like
Hamilton's tax on whiskey, but the “Whiskey Rebellion” spoke to its unpopularity,
and helped Jefferson displace the Federalists. Jefferson doubled our already
vast area by buying Louisiana, accelerating a century of raising major revenues
from land sales. Jackson even paid off the whole national debt, and went on to
distribute surpluses to the States. Many States squandered the funds, but avoided
paying the full price by stiffing their European creditors.

Before lands acquired in the Louisiana Purchase were sold out, President James
K. Polk acquired more land clear to the Pacific, our “Manifest Destiny” as he
called it. The USA became the biggest free trade zone in the world, perhaps in
history, and prospered mightily, if erratically and prodigally, with giant-swinging
cycles of boom and bust. We tied the parts together with ambitious long rails,
but financed them with land grants that spared us from taxes. When the nation
annexed lands from France and Spain and Mexico it left the private titles intact,
but freed them from the repressive tax systems of those nations. Americans old
and new grew accustomed to low domestic national tax rates, over a long period.
State and local governments performed most public functions, and lived mainly
on property taxes, a kind of tax with no taxable event in its base and thus little, if
any, disincentive effects.

Not until 1909 did the U.S. turn to a corporation income tax, spurred by
domestic demands for reform and naval and military ambitions. The personal
income tax from 1913 was carefully focused by Progressive Congresses on

36 Gaffney (2000, 2000a).
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

property income. There were no state sales taxes of consequence until 1933.°”
Not until 1942 did Congress turn seriously to taxing wage and salary incomes,
and withholding the taxes, and even then rates were graduated so steeply that
property incomes, being in the top brackets, bore much of the brunt.

Since 1945 the tide has turned sharply back towards taxing labour more and
property less, and yet even so America still taxes labour less, and property more,
than most other nations. We stand alone as the nation with no national sales tax
or facsimile thereof.

‘The USA became the biggest free trade zone in
the world, perhaps in history, and prospered
mightily, if erratically and prodigally, with giant-
swinging cycles of boom and bust.’

37 Gaffney (2000, 2000a).

114
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

3

From Wirtschaftswunder
to Common Market to EU and VAT

E PICK UP THE STORY IN 1948. World War 2 left Germany devastated,

but not for lack of money demand or purchasing power. Wartime rationing
and price controls, cum monetary stimulus — “suppressed inflation” — had left
Germans with piles of cash in Reichsmarks. Ludwig Erhard, minister of finance
under Konrad Adenauer, abolished rationing and price controls. He demonetized
Hitler’s Reichsmarks and replaced them with Deutschemarks as the new legal
tender, lowering the effective money supply by 93%. German families lost not
just capital goods, but their life savings.** They were “ruined,” so it seemed. They
didn’t even have rationing tickets.

To credit (or blame) Erhard alone would be to oversimplify. Kindleberger and
Ostrander supply a raft of details - in fact, too many.* Squinting between the
lines, though, they tell us that Military Governor General Lucius Clay supported
an early report by Colm, Dodge and Goldsmith that called for high taxes on
“unjust enrichment,” and on property and estates, but low taxes on current
“taxable events,” to stimulate incentives to work and save.“° It was in the spirit of
V-Day, roughly comparable to the Reconstruction Era following our Civil War.
Erhard was the German survivor who surfed this wave at its crest. For brevity
here, I will simply refer to Erhard’s reforms.

Erhard observed that the only rationing tickets Germans needed after the
currency reform were the new Deutschemarks, and they would work hard to get
them. The same reasoning implies that they would also put their properties to
work, if they owned any — and someone did own all the lands of Germany, and
the surviving capital as well. A song of the times captured the spirit and attitude
that emerged:

38 Heller, Walter W. “Tax and Monetary Reform in Occupied Germany.” National Tax Journal 2, no. 3 (1949: 215- 231);
Hirshleifer, Jack W. Economic Behavior in Adversity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. Klopstock, Fred H.
“Monetary Reform in Western Germany." Journal of Political Economy 57, no. 4 (1949): 277- 292; Lutz, F. A. “The Ger-
man Currency Reform and the Revival of the German Economy.” Economica 16 (May 1949): 122-142; Mendershaus-
en, Horst. “Prices, Money and the Distribution of Goods in Postwar Germany.” American Economic Review 39 (June
1949): 646-672; Wallich, Henry C. Mainsprings of the German Revival. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1955.

39 Kindleberger and Ostrander (2003).

40 Colm, Dodge and Goldsmith (1946: 185).
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

“Morgen, morgen, lacht uns wieder das Gluck
Gestern, gestern, liegt schon so weit zuruck,
war es auch eine schéne, schéne Zeit.’ *!

What followed is proclaimed asa Wirtschafiswunder, but let us not call it a
Wunder (miracle) for that suggests a supernatural cause and stifles inquiry into
real causes. It was unaccustomed Armut (poverty) that drove Germans to perform.
The first cause of poverty was the obvious: paying taxes to prepare for war, the
total war itself, losing it, being bombed, invaded, morally shamed, occupied and
plundered. Second, less obvious, was Erhard’s repudiating Hitler's Reichsmarks.
Economists who sympathize both with Erhard and private property may cover
up the contradiction by calling it “currency reform,” a “wealth effect” (or income
or liquidity effect), but the naked fact is that Erhard’s State simply stiffed its
creditors, the German people, thus confiscating their private property without
compensation. It came from recognizing that incentives come from Morgen
(tomorrow) and are only dulled by the security and comfort of holding property
in the accumulations of Gestern (yesterday). Yes, Erhard believed in free markets
and incentives; decartelization and Walter Eucken and the Freibourg School were
in vogue. Yes, Social Democrats discredited themselves by opposing Erhard, and
it is good press to mock them for their doctrinaire myopia. But generations of
conservatives since then have spun the story to blank out the positive (sic) role of
state confiscation of private property.

Few would deny today that the desperate circumstances of the times necessitated
radical “currency reform.” Now that Erhard’s policy is a fait accompli, safely in the
past, few would deny its spectacular success — it is an outstanding fact of history.
But let us learn the economic lesson. Taxes have two opposite kinds of effects.
There are the marginal effects, the kinds that Laffer and a thousand anti-taxers
preach, the disincentive effects of diluting the rewards of work and enterprise.
But there are also the wealth effects such as Erhard’s “Miracle” demonstrated.

‘The secret of raising revenues without damping
incentives is to select kinds of taxes with powerful
wealth effects and weak marginal effects.’

Germany’s experience suggests that the wealth effects may even be stronger
than the marginal effects. Certainly they are if we “play our cards right” and
choose wisely among tax alternatives. The secret of raising revenues without
damping incentives is to select kinds of taxes with powerful wealth effects and
weak marginal effects. Property taxes come close to filling the bill, and even closer
if we exempt capital improvements and movable capital (personal property) from

41 “Tomorrow, tomorrow, good fortune will laugh for us again/ yesterday, yesterday lies already so far behind/ it
was a beautiful, beautiful time.”

116
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

the tax base. VATs, at the other pole, fit the Laffer model like a glove: strong
effects on marginal incentives, and minimal wealth effects.

With the Marshall Plan the USA undertook to help rebuild western Europe
and Japan, with great success. “Social Democracy” was the slogan, to enlist
proletarians in the common struggle against the Red Menace, which so quickly
replaced the fascist menace of wartime. Former belligerents buried the dulled
hatchets of nationalism. French leaders like Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman
proposed a United States of Europe, to include the old Axis Powers, but not the
USSR or its allies. France needed Germany to stop the USSR, and Germany was
too big and robust for France to let go its own way again.

Initial steps like the European Coal and Steel Community and European
Common Market grew to become the European Union. The 1957 Treaty of
Rome created the European Community (EC), aka “The Common Market.”
In 1990 a commission led by former French Finance Minister Jacques Delors
broached a single currency, a step short of political union. French President
Francois Mitterand forced the Euro on a reluctant Germany as the price for
France’s support of German reunification after the Berlin Wall fell in 1989. The
Maastricht Treaty of 1992 created the European Union (EU). The EU adopted
the Euro. Soon the EU doubled in size, to 27 nations, including eight former
members of the Soviet bloc. France as the leader rode high. Germany’s size and
economic strength has now passed leadership partly to her, now under Chancellor
Angela Merkel.

Meantime, by 1954 the tide had started to turn back toward the attitudes
of Pancien régime with its taxes on producers, merchants and buyers. Maurice
Lauré, an engineer turned tax-man, got France to adopt VAT “to meet a fiscal
crisis” (although such spin accompanies most political moves). VAT had political
and administrative attractions, but economically speaking is only a variant form
of sales tax. France introduced the first national VAT in 1954 (the same year it
lost at Dien Bien Phu). It was not general, but destined to become so. René Coty
was the last President of the fractionated 4th Republic, but Lauré’s VAT was
declared a success.

Charismatic Charles de Gaulle succeeded Coty, founded the 5th Republic,
and presided from 1959-69. A fabled hero of /a résistance, Le Grand Charlie
could get what he wanted, and was President in 1963 when a Common Market
committee on tax “harmonization” issued the landmark (Fritz) Neumark Report
that found the French VAT to be superior to Germany’s cascading turnover tax.”
The Committee agreed to make VAT the basis of tax harmonization within the
growing EU. In 1968 France changed its VAT from partial to general.

VAT quickly metastasized around Europe. The EC required member states to
adopt VAT to enter the EU. Latin America also went along. In a second push

42 Lindholm (1976: xxx).
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

around 1990, some industrial states like Canada,** Australia, Switzerland and
Japan came on board too, along with many “developing” economies in Africa and
Asia, until today some 140 nations use VAT. They were pushed along by newly
empowered international organizations like OECD and the IMF and the World
Bank — probably not what their founders had in mind at Bretton Woods in 1944.

The USA has played a schizoid role, worldwide. The Shoup Mission to Japan
in 1949 had tried to pioneer VAT there, although in vain.“* Harry Truman’s
agent, Joseph Dodge, blocked it.

‘USAID has spent huge sums promoting and
subsidizing VAT in small nations. Only the USA
itself has rejected VAT.’

USAID has spent huge sums promoting and subsidizing VAT in small nations.
Only the USA itself has rejected VAT. Evidently there is a chasm between our
international representatives, “the best and the brightest,” and the voters at home.

By now, almost all nations except the USA have national VATs. Many
leading American economists are urging the same for the USA, chiding us for
backwardness. Many prominent economists are pushing parallel proposals as
well, under names and euphemisms like “the flat tax,” “the fair tax,” “the people’s
welfare tax,” and so on.

‘| advance a thesis that our lack of a national
VAT is a major source of U.S. fiscal strength
vis-a-vis Europe.’

A united Europe with a harmonized tax system and common currency
would seem to have realized the fondest dreams of founding fathers Schuman
and Monnet. And yet ...mobile international capital is seeking security in U.S.
Treasuries, in spite of our notorious flirtation with national bankruptcy. Here I
advance a thesis that our lack of a national VAT is a major source of U.S. fiscal
strength vis-a-vis Europe; and that established standard-brand U.S. economists
are seriously derelict in failing to point this out. Austrian-School economists are
also derelict by failing to stress how VAT distorts the structure of capital, a topic
in which they have special insight and interest.

43 Canada, which calls it a General Services Tax (GST), has only dipped a toe in the water;so far, with a national rate of
5%. Its Provinces, however, are huge. Ontario is bigger than many small nations, and Ontario's rate is 8%, for a total of
13%. Ontario also includes services in its tax base.

44 Brownlee (1985).

118
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

4

Europe after VAT:
troubles and setbacks

ODAY EUROPE IS STAGGERING. Many of its nations face bankruptcy.

Its stronger members and the institutions they dominate seek to impose
“austerity” on the resentful weaker members. Banks hold mostly their government’s
securities, crowding out small businesses that create most jobs. Unemployment
rates are breaking records. Tax collections fall ever farther behind the needs,
threatening both the governments and their bank-creditors with insolvency. Real
estate manias in nations like Spain and Ireland, new to the perils of prosperity,
have collapsed, bringing banks down with them.

Unemployment

Unemployment rates across Europe reached catastrophic levels: 10.4% in the
Euro area, and 23.3% for youths aged 15-25. Patterns diverged across nations,
with the highest youth unemployment rates in Greece (55.6%), Spain (54.2%),
Ireland (34.5%), Italy (35.1%) and Portugal (35.1%). Even in France, a pillar of
EU, the rate was 27.9%. Sturdy lowland and Baltic nations were not immune:
rates in Belgium reached 18.0%, Denmark 14.2%, Finland 18.9%, Luxembourg
18.6%, Sweden 23.4%. Central European Hungary, Poland, and the Czech
Republic have high rates, too. Latvia, where wages were so low and jobs so scarce
that she lost about 10% of her labour force to emigration, was proclaimed a
success story bys Christine LaGarde, Olivier Blanchard and other faces of the
establishment.

Debts, Public and Private

The debts of Greece, Italy and Spain made the headlines, but many “stronger”
nations also owed more than their revenues could well handle. Greece owes $315
bn. Even Germany, supposedly the EU’s economic bulwark, showed signs of
stagnation in the 1990s, leading to the sarcastic epithet “The German Disease.”
Germany's “Miracle” seems slowly to be following an Olsonian pathway from

119
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

unity and strength-through-defeat to disunity and weakness-through-success.
Germany’s claimed debt of about $2.1 trillion is rigged downwards by omitting
huge pension obligations, estimated to add another $3 trillion to the total. Some
banks in greatest danger include Germany’s DeutscheBank, biggest in Europe.

‘Governments’ creditors are mostly banks,
but these in turn are bailed out by the same
governments to whom they lend.’

Governments’ creditors are mostly banks, but these in turn are bailed out by
the same governments to whom they lend, a spiral winding only downwards
until and unless European governments raise tax rates — and find a way to do
so without stifling tax bases. The whole structure rests, finally, on tax revenues,
lacking which it is just a house of cards. However, most tax bases fall when they
are needed most, and the VAT base is falling fastest. As credit ratings fall, required
interest rates rise, so debt service rises, deficits rise, and debts keep growing, a
disastrous vicious spiral.

Pop Keynesians may see this as a virtue: deficit finance is the way to spend
our way out of recessions. That idea from 1936 would seem to have died with
the Stagflation of the 1970-79, and again with the deficit-fuelled crash of 2008,
but it keeps rising from the ashes of its own self-immolation. The unanswered
question now is, “Who will lend when both borrowers and lenders lack the will
and the ability?”

How did Europe and its fellow VAT-sters reach this sorry state?

120
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

5

Excess burdens from VAT

HE IDEA keeps resurfacing that a sales tax is made neutral by virtue of being
“general.” Many great economists have refuted it, only to be inundated by
floods of lesser voices in mass textbooks.

Retail sales taxes, however “general” or universal in their apparent coverage,
tax capital as it turns over. Turnover is measured by the sales/ capital ratio, which
is highly variable among different firms, products, locations, stages of the cycle -
and tax regimes, which economists influence. Sales taxes depress it heavily. This
is not a mindless grouch at all taxes, for we need public revenues, and some taxes
have positive effects. This is a rifle-shot at sales taxes, of which VAT is one.

To repeat for emphasis, retail sales taxes tax capital for turning over. Turnover
means replacement; and replacement sustains demand for labour. Replacement
does not just depend on sales, it anticipates them, and thereby generates the
consumer incomes that finance them: turnover is the autonomous variable that
takes the lead in the otherwise circular and now vicious circle of macro-economics
in which employers wait for consumers, while consumers wait for employers to
hire them. Turnover is measured by the sales/capital ratio, which is highly variable
among different firms, products, locations, stages of the cycle —and tax regimes,
which economists influence.

‘Turnover is the autonomous variable that takes
the lead in the otherwise circular and now vicious
circle in which employers wait for consumers,
while consumers wait for employers to hire them.’

By taxing turnover, sales taxes shrink their own base. Arthur Laffer discredited
this idea by letting his patrons apply it to a// kinds of taxes; Murray Rothbard
mistakenly applied it just to the property tax, the one major tax to which it does
not apply because it taxes capital and land for standing still, not for turning over.
These errors should not blind us to the truth in applying the idea to VAT and the

121
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

other sales taxes that “shoot anything that moves”. In the lingo of public finance,
they are contingent on “taxable events.”

Many standard textbooks and learned papers tell us that a truly general retail
sales tax, unlike an excise tax, is neutral as between one commodity and another.
A national tax is also neutral between locations, since it is the same in one region
as another. Those conditions are never approached in practice, but in the sales-tax
canon that merely means reformers should extend the reach of the tax, as the EU
does with its push for tax “harmonization” among member nations.

As already noted, Buchanan and Flowers wrote that “If the (sales) tax is
uniformly imposed on the sale of all commodities and services, there can be no
real shifting of resources from taxed employments to nontaxed employments.
The shift in relative prices occasioned by the partial tax cannot occur under a
truly general sales tax”.** We quoted and cited Harry G. Brown , Earl Rolph
and George Break, Harold Somers, Bernard Herber, David Hyman, and Charles
McLure to the same effect.

Capital proper, when affixed to land, becomes “real estate,” hence exempt by
law from sales taxes, for these apply, by law, only to sales of what we call “personal”
property (Due, 1963: 287), and which Europeans, more realistically, call movable
property. The most durable forms of capital, the kinds that Austrians believe are
over-supplied, are affixed to land, hence exempt from sales taxes and VATs.

Many “Neo-con” or “Neo-liberal” writers deplore the exemption of “services”
from the sales tax base. These writers and teachers refer in their contexts only
to labour services, ignoring the service flows of land or capital. This is not from
ignorance: they know that the “service-flow” of an owner’s home has long been
included in NIPA as a form of income, income consumed by the owner-occupant
as the real estate yields it. They just blank that out when it comes to taxing
services to the “final” consumer.“ John Stuart Mill in 1848 looked deeper, in a
proto-Austrian way, and pointed out a systemic bias inherent in the tax. I have
quoted him above.

Mill hid this light under a bushel, by offering just one example of a small
difference, and only in the form of arithmetic. It is easy to overlook in passing,
and standard-brand economists have done so. Tragically, so have most Austrian
writers, few of whom analyse tax policy. Their strong tendency is to impute the
misallocation of capital solely to misguided central bank policies, blanking out
other factors like tax policy.

Harold Groves, a clearer expositor than Mill, makes the point in a simple
table.” “Store A is engaged in a trade which has a very slow turnover, such as the
furniture business; Store B is one with a rapid turnover, perhaps a meat shop.”

45 Buchanan and Flowers (1975: 399).
46 Anderson (2003: 252).
47 Groves (1946: 113).

122
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Tax bias between slow and fast turnover businesses

I ll Ill IV Vv Vi
Operating Sales/ Sales/ Tax Tax/
STORE capital Gross sales Capital Capital @0.5% Capital
A $30,000 $30,000 1 1 $150 0.5%
B $2,000 $100,000 50 50 $500 25.0%

The sales tax is based on Column (II). It gathers much more from B, the meat
shop, than from A, the furniture store, because of B’s higher turnover and greater
volume. B’s little capital of

$2,000 turns over 50 times and is taxed 50 times a year, while A’s $30,000
turns over and is taxed just once. (Groves uses this table for another purpose, but
it serves to make Mill’s point as well.)

Again, compare a parking lot with a cafeteria. Suppose both to be taxed on
gross sales, including services. The inventory of fresh food in the cafeteria is taxed
daily, as it sells out and turns over. The payrolls are taxed daily too, for they add
to the gross value of sales. The value they add to the purchased stock of food is
capital, too: “working capital.” Or, if one prefers to ignore capital of life so brief
and so small a claim on the final product, the sales tax is simply a tax on labour.
The gross sales of parking lots, at the other extreme, include no turnover of capital
at all.

More generally, as Dan Sullivan points out, sales taxes penalize high-volume
low-mark-up marketing strategies as against their opposite. Lest one turn up his
nose at, say, Walmart, its low prices do not reflect low mark-up so much as low
labour-service per dollar of inventory. It also provides acres of free parking, a
service of land, like other big-box stores. Sullivan also notes that sellers in better
locations, say Rodeo Drive, can have higher mark-ups, so sales taxation favours
better locations over marginal ones.** New businesses with high start-up costs can
deduct them from taxable income, but not from gross sales. Clifford Cobb notes
that ghettos have many barber shops and beauty parlours but few shops carrying
commodities.” One could go on through all the Yellow Pages for thousands of
more examples.

Illustrations and Analogies

Within each business there are also differences among kinds of capital. In a retail
bakery, for example, there are pies and pie-shelves. The pies come and go, perhaps

48 Sullivan (n.d.).
49 Cobb (2014).

123
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

several times a day; the shelves last for years; the ovens for decades; the build-
ings even longer; the sites forever. Many a needy widow with hardly any capital
has earned her mite by baking, while renting the site, building and hardware.
Her sales/capital ratio is high in contrast with that of the landlord, and orbital
in contrast to timber-holding corporations like Georgia-Pacific, Weyerhaeuser,
Simpson, or the Kenneth Ford family’s Roseburg timber companies around
Roseburg, OR.

Adam Smith, with his flair for metaphor, made the point by contrasting
cargoes in foreign and domestic trade, in an age of wind-powered ocean vessels.

‘[T]he quantity of that labour, which equal capitals are capable of putting in motion,

varies extremely according to the diversity of their employment® ...A capital...

employed in the home-trade will sometimes make twelve operations, or be sent

out and returned twelve times, before a capital employed in the foreign trade

of consumption has made one...the one will give four and twenty times more

encouragement and support to the industry of the country than the other: *!

The case is even clearer when we compare two uses competing for the same
land. The one with more turnover pays more sales tax per dollar of capital
invested. The tax drives away capital that turns over fast, and reallocates the land
to capital that turns slower, or to uses requiring less capital, or no capital at all,
like the parking lot. As to the lot itself, it never turns over in the relevant sense of
wearing out and being replaced. (Owner A may sell land to Owner B, but mere
ownership turnover is a zero-sum transaction in the national accounts.)

Curiously, Harry G. Brown, a relentless critic of holding land idle, as well as
of taxes with excess burdens, does not connect his two goals in one consistent
system.” He does not recognize that sales taxes inhibit using land intensively, if
at all. His mentor Irving Fisher may have misled him. In Fisher’s tax theory, all
taxes should fall on consumption, holding land is not consumption, and capital
gains are not income at all.*

Chemists have a good vocabulary for it. Land in production is like a chemical
“catalyst”: it facilitates a process without disappearing into the product. Its
“quantum of value” remains intact in the land. Working capital is, at the other
extreme, like a “reactant”: its corpus and its quantum of value go into the product.
That means they get sales-taxed with each turnover — the basis of the Mill Effect.
Physiologists have a name for it, too: what is metabolism but the turnover of
protoplasm in cells? One could elaborate, and find analogies from other sciences,
but the point is made, and will be made once more below with Dorfman’s essay
on hydraulic engineering.

50 Smith, Book II Ch. 5, par 1.
51 Smith, Book II Ch. 5, par 27.
52 Brown (1939: 254).

53 Fisher (1937, 1942).

124
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Difficulties, solutions and measures

“Fixed” (durable) capital is a mixed, and therefore instructive story. The corpus
of fixed capital as a catalyst does not get sales-taxed, only its income plus a little
extra for depreciation get sales-taxed, as Mill wrote. Separating the catalyst from
the reactant in fixed or durable capital is a trifle less simple than with working
capital, but only marginally so. The basic mathematics of finance tells us exactly
how to divide the product between interest, the net income of capital, and
depreciation, which corresponds to the recovery or turnover of capital (and is
labeled a “Capital Consumption Allowance” (CCA) in NIPA). We only repeat
a sliver of the mathematics here, but lenders, mortgagors, bankers, and I.R.S.
agents use it every day. So do millions of innumerate consumers who buy on
the installment plan, taking the mathematics on faith. Innumerate readers may
likewise take on faith the algebra below, but here it is for those who want it.

Let “a” be a level annual cash flow lasting for “n” years. “P” is its Present
Value, found by taking the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) using an interest

aes

rate, “i”.
P =a{1-(1+i)*J/i (1)
The fraction of “a” that is interest on P is:
Pi/a = 1-(1+i)” (2)

“1” is 100%. The second term as a function of “n” forms a curve of
exponential decay (a ski-slope curve) starting from “1” when n=0 and falling to
zero when n=0o.

Thus when n=0 the cash flow is all capital recovery — there is no interest income
— and the sales tax is based entirely on turnover of pre-existing capital. At the
other extreme, when n grows big, (1+i)" — 0 and there is little capital recovery,
and that little is not taxed until after “n” years. So much for the algebra.

A unit or “quantum” of fixed capital embodied and frozen into, say, the
Oroville Dam and the long aqueducts it feeds, or the English-French “Chunnel,”
or the even longer tunnel from Sakhalin to Hokkaido, or grading steep building
sites, or land-fill in shallow water, or The Pyramids, or The Mackinac Bridge, or
the marble cladding of Nelson Rockefeller’s Parthenon in Albany, turns over so
slowly that its net product or service after O&M (Operation and Maintenance)
is mostly pure income. That product or service as a tax base, however we measure
it, includes little recovery of capital. Too often, indeed, there is none at all,
thanks to engineering megalomania coupled with the “irrational exuberance”
of land speculators and “earmarking” politicians who trade subsidies for
campaign contributions.

125
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

As to land, this never turns over. Its ownership may turn over many times,
but that is an entirely different meaning of “turnover”: it is a zero-sum game,
macro-economically. It entails no depreciation and ultimate replacement of
the lot, and no routine recovery of the original purchase price through a CCA
(Capital Consumption Allowance). In a rational market, land is priced so high
that its cash flow is just enough to cover interest on its price, with nothing left
over for a CCA. In a rising but still rational market, indeed, interest on the price
is greater than cash flow by an amount equal to annual appreciation. In a market
with “irrational exuberance,” which comes along in a regular cycle of 18 years or
so, interest often exceeds the sum of cash flow and appreciation, as we learned so
well in 1990, promptly forgot, and went through again in 2008, and began a new
cycle of forgetting in 2013.

Many economists disregard The Mill Effect by assuming, too blithely, that
sales taxes are all shifted forward to “consumers”. Even if that were 100% true it
would certainly depress demand for the over-taxed items. Most economists today
share some, at least, of the paradigm of Buchanan and Flowers wherein sales taxes
are shifted backwards to factors of production. There is a hint of this in Mill,**
but the stronger recent statement is in Harry G. Brown.” Earl Rolph, crediting
°6 Richard Musgrave, crediting both Brown and Rolph, endorses
this approach in the main, too.*” Many of us now hew to the Physiocratic doctrine
that All Taxes Come Out of Rents (ATCOR). Either way, sales taxes create “A
disturbance in The Force” — a massive and basic disturbance. To fuss over trivia,
while missing the Mill Effect, would be to strain at gnats while swallowing a
camel. For examples of such straining see Shoup and Haimoff, Somers, Rolph/
Break, and almost any popular text on public finance.

Brown, agrees.

Many texts on public finance compare a retail sales tax favourably with a
“turnover tax,” since the latter taxes every transaction up to and including the
retail stage. Thus they dispose of “turnover” by giving it an entirely different
meaning than that used by Mill, and used here. They criticize a “turnover tax” (as
sometimes used in Germany, and in the former Soviet Union, and now in Ohio)
for taxing the same capital several times, “in cascade,” as it moves from owner to
owner in successive transactions through the “stages” of production. They then
criticize how firms may avoid it by integrating vertically. Fair enough, but then
they dust off their hands as though done, leaving us the retail sales tax, imposed
at only one “stage” of production, as though it were free of taxing turnover.*®
Thus they purge The Mill Effect, the “Disturbance in The Force,” from modern

fiscal economics.

54 (Bk V, Chap 5: 517).

55 Brown (1939).

56 Rolph (1952).

57 Musgrave (1953: 318; 1959: 379).

58 While they are at it, Buchanan and Flowers want to tax unemployed people for “consuming leisure,’ The euphe-
mism dates from Chicago's Henry Simons (1938). Buchanan and Flowers do not call this a poll tax, for they disap-
prove of “emotive terms.” Yet they do not suggest taxing idle or underused land or capital for taking leisure.

126
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Mark Skousen presents a long valuable list of previous texts and learned
writings supporting Austrian capital theory. He argues against policies that drive
capital away from “lower order” capital goods that turn over quickly because they
are near to the final consumer. You would therefore expect him to take the lead
against retail sales taxes, with their bias against these lower order goods. Instead,
Skousen switches to another paradigm and favours sales taxes on the grounds that
final consumers bear them, and this exempts saving and capital formation. I have
refuted this belief elsewhere,”

As to the structure of production, Skousen writes that “a consumption tax...
would be highly favourable toward the earlier stages of production...”° But
“earlier stages of production” means unripe capital, at farthest remove from final

and will not repeat the reasoning here.

consumers, capital that ripens and turns over slowly, the kind that Austrian theory
tells us to treat less favourably, or at least not favourably. I will not labour the
obvious contradiction, but simply express dismay that no Austrian economist, to
my knowledge, has ever used Austrian-derived paradigms to criticize sales taxes.
Skousen also gives priority to repealing the “capital gains tax,” evidently believ-
ing that it is a tax on capital, as its name misleadingly suggests. Actually, most
unearned increments of value come from land. Taxing or un-taxing them has no
direct effect on the structure of capital proper. Most real capital depreciates with
time. There are some exceptions, like commercial timber and other biological
capital that does add value with time. Here, a pure gains tax would indeed con-
tain a small bias in favour of slow turnover, since the tax is deferred until sale.
The capital gains tax as we know it in practice, however, is structured to impose
higher rates on faster turnovers.

Richard Musgrave does cite the “Swedish Austrian,” Wicksell, who published
in German on tax policy, and with great insight. In laboured prose, Musgrave
finally concludes that a tax on “gross receipts...leads to a lengthening of the
average period of investment”.

As to definitions and measurement, some economists see nothing but
insoluble problems in measuring or even conceiving of the lifetime of a simple
capital item, and even worse problems with the average lifetime of a collection
of heterogeneous items. The matter may be made to seem hopelessly complex,
and a battery of economists, following J.B. Clark and Frank Knight, ever stand
too ready to oblige.

Fred Foldvary, an “Austrian” thinker, neatly solves the problem by distinguishing
concrete items of capital as “capital goods,” while “capital” standing alone means
the quantum of value.“ This quantum of value is relayed from one concrete
capital good to another with each turnover (cycle of liquidation and replacement).

59 5kousen (1990, Chap. 4, pp. 84-130 et passim).
60 Gaffney (2009).

61 Skousen (1990: 345).

62 Gaffney (1957: 1970-71, 2006; Vickrey (1971).
63 Musgrave (1953: 392-99, 396-97).

64 Foldvary (2016).

127
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

In this relaying the capital becomes completely fungible in form and composition
and location. Fungibility is a concept that most economists grasp and teach,
although some resist the idea of capital as a quantum of value — something
more obvious to accountants, however, and, as Dorfman showed, to hydraulic
engineers.

Hydraulic physics and engineering provide a simple solution, ably expounded
by Robert Dorfman in an article I cannot praise too highly.® Dorfman
whimsically calls it “The Bathtub Theorem,” and properly acknowledges Knut
Wicksell’s priority with his “grape-juice model,” although Dorfman’s model is
more general. Dorfman’s bottom line is that the higher the sales/capital ratio, the
faster a quantum of value will travel through a fund of capital. More briefly yet,
the mean turnover of capital is the sales/capital ratio.® For the lady baking pies
and selling out daily the annual ratio is 365. For the boreal forester the annual
ratio is 1/70. Both figures may be modified slightly for elegant variations on
the main point, but the difference of 26,000 times illustrates the Mill Effect so
starkly, why bother with more? For doubters and masochists Dorfman provides
many equations, but ends them delightfully by saying “Tt is nice that this elaborate
calculation is really unnecessary”.””

Dorfman does not treat land separately, which is a fault. Neither does he analyse
sales taxes and their effects. I have supplied the lack. For now it is enough that
we can measure turnover simply, and it varies hugely among sales-taxable items
and firms.

Professor William Vickrey contributed a general mathematical model published
as an Appendix to my “Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital”. He showed how
“Yield Taxes” (sales taxes on timber harvests) slow down average rotation periods.
He equates average tree life with the sales/capital ratio simply by inverting the
order of integration — a simple trick for him, a mathematician.” It was consistent
with his lifelong efforts to tax capital gains as they accrue, following the Haig-
Simons definition of income.

Summary

We are left with this. Jobs depend on turnover. Turnover is measured by the
sales/capital ratio, which varies hugely among different firms, products, locations,
stages of the cycle — and tax regimes. Elected officials control the last, and we as
economists try, at least, to influence elected officials. Sales taxes, rampant and
rising in our times, depress turnover heavily, and so depress demand for labour —
both the number of jobs and their pay rates.

65 Dorfman (1959).

66 Dorfman (ibid. p.353).

67 Dorfman (ibid., p. 372).

68 Gaffney (1976, mathematical appendix).
69 Gaffney (1971).

70 Vickrey (1971).

128
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Property taxes have the opposite effect, and so may some aspects of income
taxation. We do not here address how both property and income taxes may be
modified for the better, although they may and should be. Our main point here is
that sales taxes (and their twin, VAT) are among the worst possible choices when
the objective is to make jobs and raise pay rates.

The USA, with all its faults, has no national VAT. We do not lack for crusading
VATsters. They chide us for being behind Europe. As the EU careens to financial
crisis, and derivative political crises, while world capital flees for refuge in the
USA, the evidence of history is not speaking well for VAT. Forecasting is perilous,
and some see doom ahead for the U.S. dollar, but as of this writing the evidence
is against VAT. What Dien Bien Phu did for France’s empire, VAT is doing for
France’s economy, and with it all of Europe’s.

‘Sales taxes, rampant and rising in our times,
depress turnover heavily, and so depress demand
for labour - both the number of jobs and their
pay rates.’

129
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

6

Scholarly origins of
and support for VAT

E HAVE SEEN how Maurice Lauré pioneered VAT in France in 1954,

whence it grew with the idea of European Union, before going viral around
the world. Lauré was not the first to broach the idea, however. Others had been
tilling the seedbed before. Of course, everyone touting a retail sales tax had been
conditioning minds for years before, but there were only few who limned out the
specific form of VAT.

One was the American economist Thomas S. Adams.’”! Adams was disturbed
by the growth of income taxes, especially on “business” (property) incomes, and
proposed substituting a national tax on gross sales. His prose was muddy and
equivocal, and anyway, Andrew Mellon soon led Congress to lower surtax rates
on high incomes, relieving much of rich families’ grievances and Adams’ case
against income taxes.

Another was Wilhelm von Siemens,” who saw VAT as a technical improvement
to avoid cascading in the German sales tax. Siemens could cite some earlier
pamphlets as supports, but they and he were only on the margins of power and
there was no follow-up. Soon German governments, saddled with debts and
reparations, turned from collecting taxes to printing money, causing one of
history’s worst hyperinflations.

The high income-tax rates of World War 1 in the USA led to a spate of proposals
for a national sales tax, including some from Andrew Mellon, W.R. Hearst,
Ogden Mills, and his allegedly liberal friend R.T. Ely. While they never prevailed
nationally, their views reinforced a climate of opinion that influenced the many
states that rushed in a horde to substitute retail sales taxes for property taxes in
the 1930s. Another less obvious factor was the 18th Amendment (Prohibition)
which cut deeply into Federal revenues from sumptuary excise taxes on alcohol,
forcing more reliance on income taxes, both corporate and personal. The du Pont
family subsidized the campaign to repeal the 18th Amendment, a less extreme
but more successful move to relieve themselves and their class from income taxes.

71 Adams QJE (August 1921).
72 Von Siemens (1918).

130
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

The du Ponts, as major owners of GM, also had an interest in holding down
gasoline taxes.”

The next tranche of advocates included scholars Irving Fisher, Kaldor, Meade,
and Prest. Following World War 2, Carl Shoup of Columbia joined the tranche.
General Douglas MacArthur as head of SCAP” was in a position to dictate many
policies to occupied Japan, and he picked Shoup to head an advisory group on
tax policy. Shoup, of professorial and objective mien, was the scion of Paul Shoup,
President of the Southern Pacific Railroad and developer of upper class Los Altos
in San Mateo County. Shoup came out strongly for a VAT.” He was one of the
first American economists to push VAT abroad. Like MacArthur, he hoped that
his policies applied first in a foreign nation would set an example to be followed in
the USA itself, but it did not work out that way, either for him or later Americans
working for the IMF, World Bank, OECD, and other international bureaucracies.

More recent champions are Pete Peterson, Harold Somers, Michael Dukakis
and his advisor Larry Summers, Cary Brown, James Buchanan, Paul Krugman,”
G.N. Hatsopolous, James Poterba, Steve Forbes, Rick Perry, Robert Hall and Alvin
Rabushka backed by The Hoover Institution, Newt Gingrich, Milton Friedman,
Richard Armey, Henry Aaron, Charles McLure, Richard Lindholm, John Due,
Raymond Mikesell, Arnold Harberger and many others. The Republican platform
of 2012 even included a plank to repeal the 16th Amendment and adopt a national
VAT. Centrists scoffed at the extremism, but in our times we have seen how fast,
sometimes, extreme becomes mainstream.

The EU as Enforcement Cartel

The European Union has required and spawned its own governing legislatures
and bureaucracies in bewildering array, layered on top of existing national bureau-
cracies. These new agencies take on powers and lives and agenda and academic
satrapies of their own, like our own Federal Reserve System. Like most bureaucra-
cies they tend to aggrandize and perpetuate themselves and freeze in place. A major
recent shift is evident. Control has shifted from Social Democrats to Conserva-
tives representing bankers and other lenders. A critic describes them as the “giant
Goldman-Sachs squid.” The metaphor is exaggerated, but a useful mnemonic of
where power now lies.

In 1998 the OECD was pressuring errant nations to raise tax rates. It campaigned
against tax regimes it stigmatized as “harmful” because they might attract
mobile capital.”” By 2013, raising income taxes was off the table, unthinkable,

73 More recently Pierre (Pete) Samuel du Pont IV, ex-Governor of Delaware, has come out against state sales taxes.
Times and families change, or perhaps “Pete” is cycling back to his ancestor and namesake, PS. du Pont the Physiocrat.
Otherwise, however, he is prominent in ultra-conservative causes and politics.

74 Supreme Command, Allied Powers.

75 Shoup was overborne by the rival mission of Detroit banker Joseph Dodge, representing Truman, who preferred
income taxes modified by fast write-off.

76 It is hard to understand how Krugman, today’s leading champion of deficits, in 1989 co-authored
Overconsumption, a criticism of spending,

77 Report of OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs (1998), Harmful Tax Competition, an Emerging Global Issue

131
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

unmentionable, a solecism. The prevailing dogma was that raising tax rates would
choke recovery and lower the tax base, as Laffer once warned. The focus was on
“austerity,” meaning to lower spending on social programs and force down wage
rates. Protesters in debtor nations see The Troika and its appanages as a hydra-
headed cartel of bankers and Germans to reduce them to debt slavery. Conspiracy
theory and paranoia? More likely what we see is just the unconscious or semi-
conscious comity of people with common interests working in harmony. Either
way the results are much the same.

One thing the old and the new EU agencies share in common is making an
ideal of tax “uniformity” among nations. Sales-taxers have long seen their need
for the same ideal within nations or even big states. California is our biggest State
in all but area, and also the most isolated by topography, so it most resembles a
nation. Accordingly, it has led the march to state sales taxes. For example, in 1955,
California sales-taxers invoked the doctrine of “uniformity”: if only every city
raised the sales tax, no retailer or buyer could escape it by fleeing toa city without
one. Accordingly, our Legislature encouraged local sales taxes state-wide.’® The
State collects it, and returns it to each municipality of origin. A central power
can overcome interjurisdictional tax competition, as Europe’s Troika agencies are
attempting now. Thus, EU was the necessary pre-condition for VAT. The two
have grown together.

‘Europe now enjoys a colossal Peace Dividend,
one of the biggest and longest in history. The idea
that this should lead to national bankruptcies is
absurd and ridiculous.’

Why do lender groups like Europe’s Troika come to the aid of debtors
approaching peonage?

It is a survival mechanism found in nature. Most parasites stop short of
destroying their hosts because they need them for the future. Most predator
populations leave behind a saving remnant of their prey to supply the next
generation of their food supply. Mankind most consciously saves both the seed
corn and the breeding stock for future generations. Thus lender groups have an
interest in keeping borrowers solvent enough to repay the principal of debts,
while also risky enough to have low credit ratings calling for high interest rates.
Lenders also want to discourage debtors from seeking other lenders, and maintain
a united front to discipline debtors who default.

Has Europe reached the limit of its taxable capacity? The thought is nonsense
in the light of history. The Cold War wound down from 1989. Today the USA,

78 Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7200.

132
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

the only nation with no VAT, bears the cost of policing and defending Europe,
and most of the world too. Europe for centuries before now poured its treasures
into a series of internecine wars from which the EU has rescued it. Europe now

‘The bottom line is that Europe is strangling itself
with VAT, while the USA, for all its many serious
faults, is surviving better without one.

enjoys a colossal Peace Dividend, one of the biggest and longest in history. The
idea that this should lead to national bankruptcies is absurd and ridiculous on its
face. The alternative hypothesis is that Europe’s woes are endogenous. A major
cause is heavy reliance on VAT — the main tax to which Laffer’s warnings might
apply — and the lack of substantial taxes on property or its income, the taxes
to which Laffer’s strictures least apply. The evidence of Europe’s solvency and
untapped taxable capacity is the high level of its land prices compared with
America’s. International buyers are paying record-smashing figures for homes
in world-class neighbourhoods like Woodside and Los Alto Hills, San Mateo
County, for example, because our prices, steep as they look to us, are still cheaper
and the quality of life may be better than in counterpart regions of Europe.”
The bottom line is that Europe is strangling itself with VAT, while the USA,
for all its many serious faults, is surviving better without one. Well may we
chant, “Vive la différence? We still cling to the remnants of a property tax system
inherited from earlier times when we led the world in real production and real
per capita income, making us a magnet for immigrants from the world — from

‘Let us pray that the python of VAT never wraps
us in its coils; let us work to make that prayer
come true.

the “wretched refuse” kind to the most talented kind, both of which strengthen
us when we offer them chances to work and invest productively. We have an
income tax system that, while riddled now with counterproductive loopholes,
still prohibits the tax-depreciation of land and occasionally succeeds in taxing the
unearned increment of land values. We still find some investment “loopholes”
that were designed constructively to reward real income-creating investing in new
capital. Let us pray that the python of VAT never wraps us in its coils; let us work
to make that prayer come true.

79 LAT 1-29-13, p.B5.

133
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

Bibliography

“On saving Europe”, The Economist, 9-17-2011.

Aaron, Henry, and Harvey Galper, 1985, Assessing Tax Reform. Washington: The
Brookings Institution Adams, Thomas S., 1921, “Fundamental Problems of Federal
Income Taxation”. QJE 35 (4):528-53.

Andelson, Robert A., with Mason Gaffney, 1979. “E.R.A. Seligman’s Attack on “The
Single Tax”. In Andelson, R.A. (ed.), Critics of Henry George. Madison, N.J.: The
Fairleigh- Dickinson Univ. Press, pp. 273-92.

Anderson, John E., 2003. Public Finance. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin co.

Anderson, B.M., Jr, 1913-14, “'Unearned increments’, land taxes, and the building
trade” Q/E XXVIII, pp. 411-14.

Arnott, Richard, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1979. “Aggregate land rents, expenditures on public
goods, and city size.” Q/E XCIII(4), November.

Bigelow, John, (ed.) 1868. Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. Philadelphia: J.B.
Lippincott; London: Triibner & Co.

Blommestein, Hans J., et a/., 2011. Overview OECD Sovereign Borrowing Outlook,
OECD Journal Financial Market Trends Vol. 2011 #2.

Bogart, William T., David E Bradford, and Michael G. Williams, December 1992.
“Incidence and allocation effects of a state policy shift: the Florio initiatives in New
Jersey”. Working paper #4177. Cambridge, MA, NBER. Rpt. NTJ.

Bradford, William, 1627, History of Plymouth Plantation, from the original ms of
Bradford’s history Of Plimoth Plantation, Book II. Boston: Wright and Potter Printing
Company, State Printers, 1898, pp. 258- 61.

Brinkley, Alan, 1982, Voices of Protest. NY: A.A. Knopf.

Brown, Harry G., 1924, rpt 1979. The Economics of Taxation. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press. Chapter III.

Brown, Harry G., 1939. “The incidence of a general output or general sales tax”. /PE
47: 254-62. Rpt as corrected in Musgrave, Richard A., and Carl S. Shoup (eds.), 1959,
Readings in the Economics of Taxation, 1959, Selected by a Committee of the AEA,
Homewood IL, Richard D. Irwin, Inc.

Brownlee, W. Elliot, 1985, “Wilson and Financing the Modern State: The Revenue Act of
1916”. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 129 (2), pp. 173-210.

134
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Buchanan, James, and Marilyn R. Flowers, 1975, The Public finances. Homewood, IL:
Richard D. Irwin Co.,

Chernow, Barbara — see Columbia Encyclopedia.
Cobb, Clifford, 2014, letter to the author.

Colm., G., J.M. Dodge and R.W. Goldsmith (1946), A Plan for the Liquidation of War
Finance and the Financial Rehabilitation of Germany, Office of Military Government For
Germany (U.S.), May 20.

Columbia Encyclopedia, The, 5th Ed, 1995 (Barbara A. Chernow and George A. Vallasi
(eds.).

Commager, Henry Steele, and Richard Morris, 1975. The Spirit of seventy-six. NY:
HarperCollins Publishers. Rpt 1995, Da Capo Press ppb.

Commons, John R., 1934, rpb 1961. Institutional Economics. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, 1961; first published by The Macmillan Company, 1934. Vol. II, p.
819.

De Jong, Frank, 2012, Letter to the author, 10-20.
Domar, Evsey D., 1953. “The case for accelerated depreciation”. Q/E XLVII, pp. 493-519.

Domar, Evsey D., and Richard A. Musgrave, 1943-44, “Proportional Income Taxation
and Risk-Taking”, QJE LVII (May 1944); rpt in Musgrave, Richard A., and Carl S.
Shoup (eds.), 1959, Readings in the Economics of Taxation, 1959, Selected by a Committee
of the AEA, Homewood IL, Richard D. Irwin, Inc. pp. 493-524.

Dorfman, Robert, 1959, “The Bathtub Theorem”. Q/E.
Due, John, 1963. Government Finance. 3rd Ed. Homewood, IL: Richard T. Irwin Co.

Due, John, 1972. “The proposal for a federal VAT to substitute for local property taxes in
financing education”. Taxation with Representation, pp. 41-46.

Ebel, Robert D., 1972, The Michigan business activities tax. East Lansing, MI: Board of
Trustees of MI State Univ.

Ebel, Robert D. and Papke, James A. 1967. “A closer look at the VAT”. NTA Proceedings,
pp. 158-59 Ebrill, Liam et al., 2001, The Modern VAT. Cited in Kathryn James, q.v.

Ebrill, Liam et a/., 2001, The Modern VAT. Cited in Kathryn James, q.v.

Eisner, Robert, 1952, “Depreciation allowances, replacement requirements, and growth’.

AER LXVI, pp. 820-52.

European Economic Council, First, Second, and Sixth Council Directives, 1967, 1977,
and 2006.

Fisher, Irving, 1937. “Income theory and income taxation in practice”. Econometrica V

pp. 1-56.

Fisher, Irving, 1942. Constructive income taxation. NY: Harper and Bros.

135
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

Foldvary, Fred E., 2008, “The Gaffney Quantum Leap Effect”, Prosper Australia
htpps://www.prosper.org.au/2008.

Foldvary, Fred E., 2016, “Shifting the Landscape”, in Fred Harrison (Ed), Rent Unmasked.
London: Shepheard-Walwyn (publishers) Ltd., pp. 85-104.

Foner, Eric, 1988. Reconstruction. New York: Harper and Row, Publishers.

Foner, Philip, 1948, 1974, Introduction to Thomas Paine, The Age of Reason, Secaucus,
NJ: Citadel Press.

Gaffney, Mason, 1962. “Ground rent and the allocation of land among firms’. In Miller,
Frank (ed.), Rent Theory. Univ. of MO Research Bulletin #810, MO A.E.S., pp. 30-39,
74-82.

Gaffney, Mason, 1970. “Adequacy of land as a tax base”. In Holland, Daniel (ed.),
The Assessment of land value. Madison: The U. of Wisconsin Press, pp. 157-212.
Gaffney, Mason, 1988. “Tapping land rents after Prop. 13”. Western Tax Review (annual),
pp. 1-55.

Gaffney, Mason, 1991, ‘Capital’ Gains and the Future of Free Enterprise. A paper delivered
at a program with James Poterba at the annual meetings of “Common Ground”,
Philadelphia.; rev. D/91. Used as Working Paper, Dept. of Economics, U.C.R.; and for

class notes.

Gaffney, Mason, 1993. The Taxable capacity of land. In Patricia Salkin (ed.), Land Value
Taxation. Albany: The Government Law Center of Albany Law School, pp. 59-82. Also
in Proceedings, pp. 60-74.

Gaffney, Mason, 2005. “The sales tax: history of its fallen champions”. For class use. Also
entitled “Sales tax suicides through history”, but lacking long bibliography.

Gaffney, Mason, 2009, “Four Vampires of Capital”. Land and Liberty , 212 Piccadilly,
London, Vol. 116 (4), #1224, pp. 12-17.

Gaffney, Mason, 2009, “The Hidden Taxable Capacity of Land”, /nternational J. of Social
Economics, Vol. 36 #4 , pp. 328-411. Extensive bibliography, pp. 393-403.

Gide, Charles, 1890-91. “The single tax and the Jmpot Unique’. QJE V,pp. 494-95.

Gide and Rist, 2nd Edn, 1948, History of Economic Doctrine. London: George G. Harrap
& Co.

Goode, Richard, 1955. “Accelerated depreciation allowances as a stimulus to growth’.
QJE LXIX pp. 191-221.

Groves, Harold, 1946, Public Finance. New York: Henry Holt and Co.

Hagemann, Harald, 2013. “Germany after World War II: Ordoliberalism, the Social
Market Economy, and Keynesianism’. History of. ‘Economic Thought and Policy, Issue 1

Harberger, Arnold, 1966. “Let’s try the VAT”. Challenge 15, pp. 16-18.

Hatsopolous, G.N., Paul Krugman, and James Poterba, 1989. Overconsumption.
Washington, D.C., and Waltham, MA.

136
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Hayek, FA., 1951. John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor. Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press.

Heller, Walter W. “Tax and Monetary Reform in Occupied Germany.” National Tax
Journal 2, no. 3 (1949): 215-231.

Herber, Bernard, 1967. Modern Public Finance. Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.

Hill, Malcolm, 1999. Statesman of the Enlightenment — the life of Anne-Robert Turgot.
London: The OTHILA Press.

Hirshleifer, Jack W. Economic Behavior in Adversity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1987.

Hotelling, Harold, 1938. “The general welfare in relation to the problems of taxation and
of railway and utility rates”. Econometrica 6: 242-69.

Hutchison A.R., 1968. Land rent as public revenue in Australia. Melbourne: Land Values
Research Group.

Hyman, David, 1990. Public Finance. 3rd Ed. Chicago: Dryden Press.

James, Kathryn, 2011. “Exploring the Origins and Global Rise of VAT”. The VAT Reader,
Tax Analysts 2011, pp. 15-22.

Kaldor, Nicholas, 1955. An expenditure tax. London: George Allen and Unwin.

Keen, Michael, and Ben Lockwood, 2007, The Value-Added Tax: its Causes and
Consequences. (IMF Working Paper 183).

Kindleberger, Charles P., and E. Taylor Ostrander, 2003. “The 1948 Monetary Reform in
Western Germany”. Chapter 7 in Flandreau, Marc, Carl-Ludwig Holtfrerich, and Harold
James (eds.), International Financial History in the Twentieth Century, German Historical
Society, Washington, D.C., and Cambridge University Press, pp. 169-196.

Klein, Julius, 1920. The Mesta. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.

Klopstock, Fred H. “Monetary Reform in Western Germany.” Journal of Political Economy
57, no. 4 (1949): 277-292.

Lauré, Maurice, 1954. Influence de la fiscalité sur la formation de lépargne’. Rev. de sciences
et legislation financiers, pp. 290-309.

Lindholm, Richard, 1976, Value-added Tax and Other Reforms. Chicago: Nelson-Hall
Inc. (Outstanding bibliography included.)

Lindholm, Richard W., 1951. “The impact of accelerated depreciation”. N7J IV, pp.
180-86.

Lutz, E A. “The German Currency Reform and the Revival of the German Economy.”
Economica 16 (May 1949): 122-142.

Marshall, Alfred, 1947. Principles of economics. 8th ed. London: Macmillan and Co. Pp.
794- 804.

McLure, Charles, 1972. VAT: two views. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Inst.

137
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

McWilliams, David, 2011. “Small savers will pay price if euro goes into meltdown”. Irish
Independent Nov. 30.

Medina, Harold, 1960. (former judge, Atty. with Swaine, Cravath and Moore, NY). A
written legal opinion for PI. Prentice, of TIME, Inc. Copies on file.

Mendershausen, Horst. “Prices, Money and the Distribution of Goods in Postwar
Germany.” American Economic Review 39 (June 1949): 646-672.

Mill, John Stuart, 1848. Principles of Political Economy. People’s ed. Boston: Lee and
Shepard.

Musgrave, Richard, and Evsey Domar — see Domar.

Musgrave, Richard, 1953, Theory of Public Finance. New York: McGraw-Hill National
industrial Conference Board, 1929, pp. 163-66).

Nelson, Carl, Gladys Blakey and Roy Blakey, 1935. Sales Taxes. Minneapolis: League of

Minnesota Cities.

Neumark, Fritz, 1963. Neumark report of fiscal. ‘and / financial. committee on tax harmonization
in the common market. Chicago: Commerce Clearing House.

Nevins, Allan, and Henry Steele Commager, rpt 1996, Pocket History of the U.S., Trustees
of Columbia University.

New Columbia Encyclopedia (NCE).

Norton, Thomas J., 1941. Zhe Constitution of the U.S. Cleveland: The World Publishing
Company, p.51

Oakland, William, 1972. “A national VAT”. Taxation with representation. Pp.61-66.
Oakland, William, 1987, “Value-added Tax”, in The New Palgrave.

Parlement de Paris, 1784, Rémonstrance of the First Two Estates to Turgot’s 6 edicts.
Peterson, Pete, 1987. “The Morning After.” The Atlantic Monthly, October.

Pigou, A.C., 1928. .A Study in Public Finance. London: Macmillan.

Prest, A.R., 1963. “A VAT coupled with a reduction in taxes on business profits”. British
Tax Review. Pp. 338-41.

Quesnay, Francois, ca. 1760, rpt 1963, various works.In Ronald Meek (ed.), The Economics
of Physiocracy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Ramsey, EP. 1927. “A Contribution to the theory of taxation”. EJ XXXVII pp. 47-62.

Rolph, Earl, and George Break, 1949, “The Welfare Aspects of Excise Taxes”, /PE 47(1).
Rpt. In Musgrave, Richard, and Carl Shoup, q.v.

Rothbard, Murray, 1997. The Single Tax: Economic and Moral Implications. The Mises
Institute and London: Edward Elgar. At p. 197. Rebutted by Gaffney, 2009, pp. 328-411,
pp. 95-96.

Roy, Joaquin, 2007, Reflections on the Treaty of Rome and Today’ EU. Coral Gables: Miami

European Union Center.

138
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

Salmon, Felix, 2011. Europe’s disastrous summit. www.reuters.com/us, Dec 9, 2011
00:56 EST.

Sanborn, E B. (ed.), 1890. ‘The single tax discussion held at Saratoga Sept. 5, 1890. Concord,
MA, Reported for the American Social Science Assn.

“Saratoga single tax debate”, 1890. /. of Social Science 27, October.
Schenk, Alan, and Oliver Oldman, 2007, Value Added Tax: a Comparative Approach.
Shoup Mission, 1949 and 1950, Report on Japanese Taxation. 4 Vols. Tokyo: SCAP.

Shoup, Carl, 1948. “Incidence of the corporate income tax: capital structure and turnover
rates”. NT], 1, pp. 12-18.

Shoup, Carl, 1956-57, “Theory and background of the VAT”. NTA Proceedings, pp. 6-20.
Shoup, Carl, 1969, Public Finance. Chicago: Aldine.
Shoup, Carl, 1972, “The VAT”. Taxation with representation. Pp. 67-72.

Shoup, Carl, and Louis Haimoff, 1934. “The Sales Tax”. Columbia Law Review 34:5 pp.
809-30 and at p.312.

Simon, Herbert, 1943. “Incidence of a tax on urban real estate”. Q/E 57: 398-420.
Skousen, Mark, 1990. The Structure of production. NY: The NYU Press.

Skousen, Mark, 2009, 2nd Ed., The making of modern economics. Armonk, NY: M.E.
Sharpe.

Slitor, Richard E., 1963. “The VAT as an alternative to corporate income tax”. Tax Policy,
Nov.-Dec.

Smith, Adam, 1776, Wealth of Nations. 5th Edition. Rpt 1937, NY: Modern Library.
Smith, Dan Throop, 1970. “VAT: the case for”. Harvard Business Review 48, pp. 77-85.

Somers, Harold, 1964. The Sales Tax. Sacramento: Assembly interim committee on
revenue and taxation, California Legislature.

Statesman of the Enlightenment — see Hill, Malcolm.

Stiglitz, Joseph, 1977. “The theory of local public goods”. In Martin Feldstein and Robert
Inman (eds.), Zhe Economics of Public Services, International Economic Assn., Vol.43.

Stiglitz, Joseph, 2010, Freefall. W.W. Norton.

Sullivan, Clara K., 1965, The Tax on Value Added. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sullivan, Dan, 20014, letter to the author.

Surrey, Stanley, 1970. “The VAT: the case against”. Harvard Business Review 48: pp. 86-94
“Taxation with Representation”, 1972, The VAT: a preliminary analysis. Arlington, VA.
Tideman, Nicolaus, 1999. “Better-than-neutral’ taxation’. Unpublished ms.

Ture, Norman, 1972. VAT: Two Views. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Inst.

139
Beyond Brexit: The Blueprint

Turgot, A.R.J. — see Hill, Malcolm.

Turgot, A.R. Jacques, 1766, (Kenneth Jupp transl., 1999), Reéflexions sur la Formation et
la Distribution des Richesses. London: Othila Press.

Vallasi, George A. — see Columbia Encyclopedia.

Van Doren, Carl, 1938. Benjamin Franklin. NY: The Viking Press.

Vickrey, William, 1947. Agenda for Progressive Taxation. New York: Ronald Press.
Vickrey, William, 1971. Mathematical appendix to Gaffney, 1971.

Vickrey, William, 1977. “The city as a firm’. Public Economics, papers of William Vickrey.
Rpt In Martin Feldstein and Robert Inman (eds) The Economics of Public Services.

von Siemens, C.F, 1921, /mproving the Sales Tax.

Wallich, Henry C. Mainsprings of the German Revival. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1955.

Weiss, Martin, and Larry Edelson, June 18 2012, “Double Trauma Strikes Europe”,
Money and Markets.

Wicksell, Knut, 1901, transl. E. Classen 1938. The “grape-juice model”, from Lectures on
Political Economy. NY: The Macmillan Co., pp. 172 ff.

Williams, T. Harry, 1969, Huey Long. NY: A.A. Knopf.

Young, Allyn A., 1929, Review of “A.C. Pigou: a Study in Public Finance”. E.J. XXXIX
(March 1929). Rpt in Musgrave, Richard A., and Carl S. Shoup (eds.), 1959, Readings
in the Economics of Taxation, 1959, Selected by a Committee of the AEA. Homewood IL,
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. pp. 13-18.

140
Europe's fatal affair with VAT

141
