[Reprinted from the Proceedings of the Sixty-Fourth Annual Conference
on Taxation sponsored by the National Tax Association, 1971.]

THE PROPERTY TAX IS A PROGRESSIVE TAX

M. Mason GAFFNEY

Resources for the Future, Inc. \
Washington, D.C. oS

Introduction

“The regressive property tax” has become a common block phrase
among economists and in the popular press. President Nixon’s sup-
port for revenue-sharing is increasingly based on the need to protect
the poor from heavy property taxes. Some prominent tax economists
are favoring even sales taxes to make the tax system more progressive,
by lowering the property tax.1 Even local income taxes, which are
mainly payroll taxes, are being advanced to relieve property and the
poor.

I find this implausible. To own property is to be rich, in the measure
that one owns, and to tax the quality of richness should not be pre-
sumed to burden the poor more than the rich. As to the elderly, it is
only traditional for interest groups to hide behind selected widows, and
one should rarely take such appeals at face value. And so I propose
critically to examine the bases for alleging the property tax to be
regressive.

The Founding Fathers regarded property taxes as redistributive and
equalitarian. James Madison wrote:

In England, at this day, if elections were open to all classes of people,
the property of landed proprietors would be unsure. ... Landholders
ought to have a share in the government, to support these invaluable
interests, .... They ought to be so constituted as to protect the minority
of the opulent against the majority.2

Madison also wrote “... the most common and durable source of fac-
tions has been the various and unequal distribution of property.” He
foresaw that the landless majority might use government to redistribute
property. “To secure ... private rights against the danger of such a
faction ... is then the great object ....”3

The constitutional safeguard which the Founders established is the

1 Joseph Pechman, “Fiscal Federalism for gine 1970's,” National Tax Jour-
nal 24 (3): 281-90 (September 1971), p.

2Louis Hacker, Triumph of ‘American Coniralicm (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1947), p. 187.

3 The Federalist #73, cited in Charles Beard, An Economic Interpretation
of the Constitution (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1935), pp. 156-58.
PROPERTY TAXATION 409
“regulation of apportionment.” “Representatives and direct taxes shall
be apportioned among the several States which may be included within
this Union, according to their respective numbers, ....”4 It was de-
signed to win the support of property owners by assuring them that
the new federal government would be financed mainly by excise taxes
rather than property taxes 5 and that when property taxes were used,
states above average in property per capita would be spared.®
Property qualifications on voting were widespread at this time.
in the opinion of conservative people they barely sufficed to exclude
from the suffrage such shiftless persons as had no visible interest in
keeping down the taxes.”7 Throughout the 19th century the suffrage
was extended (it is not universal even yet), and government func-
tiéns ‘increased. Public schools became popular, and increasingly tax-
financed. E. R. A. Seligman seems to perceive the property tax as
redistributive in opposing exclusive reliance on it: . it involves some
tisk ‘for a small class to pay the taxes and for a large class to vote on
them ....” 8 (Ironically, Seligman is Known as a proponent of the
ability ethic of taxation.) A common argument for sales and income
taxes over property taxes is their “broad base,” discouraging the poor
from voting for public extravagance. “Broad-based” seems quite like
“regressive.” ‘
Property qualifications for the vote are not dead. Special improve-
ment district boards throughout the west are elected by landowners
alone (notably excepting California Wright Act Irrigation Districts).
The prevailing argument for limited suffrage is that so nicely distilled
by Seligman supra.® In the settlement of the west, the county property
tax was traditionally the fiscal means by, which small settlers and home-
steaders asserted some public equity in the lands of large absentees,
ranches, and speculators. In some areas, ‘owners covering whole coun-
ties (like Kenedy County, Texas) refused to sell to immigrants, to
keep them from voting and raising county taxes— which the big
owners evidently perceived as redistributive. Company towns like
Arvin, California, have been kept unincorporated to keep migrant la-
borers from using the property tax on the owners. All of northern
Maine is unincorporated, ostensibly because Great Northern and a few

“

4 Article I, sect. 2, clause 3; and sect. 9, clause 4.

5 A. Hamilton, 7. he Federalist #12.

6 Charles Beard, An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, op. cit.,
p: 169. - See also pp. 100-03, on Hamilton’s support from speculators in
western lands.

. F John Fiske, The Critical Period of American History (Cambridge: The
Riverside Press, 1888), p.

Spssas in Taxation Pi ndon: Macmillan and Co. Ltd., 8th ed. 1919),

p. 7
8 See Wells Hutchins, Irrigation Districts, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Technical Bulletin #254, 1931, pp. 15-16.
410 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

other paper companies want to avoid letting immigrant voters tax their
property. Similarly, industrial tax enclaves in metropolitan areas keep
out resident voters. In the Southeast half the poor have been disen-
franchised because of poll taxes and race. The southeast relies less on
the property tax than other regions. If the property tax were regres-
sive the dominant minority would seem rationally to have imposed it
on the disenfranchised poor. Instead they pioneered the state sales tax.

H. D. Simpson has pointed out how property owners favored the
“contract” as opposed to “organic” theory of government. Under the
contract theory, property could be charged only for benefits received
(rather narrowly construed). Under organic theory, the public asserts
its equity for redistributive ends, taxing ad valorem without reference
to the source of value. “The opponents of expansion (of public serv-
ices), representing largely the property classes who would have to
carry the cost of these expansions and who would participate least in
their benefits, necessarily fell back on the Benefit Theory, ...”2° The
benefit or contract theory lives today under the saying that property
should only pay for services to property, not services to people. The
animus is that property taxes to finance schools are redistributive.
Services to property are often opposed, too. Property taxes to finance
any mass system that favors small over large holdings inspire resist-
ance in the spirit of attorney Maxwell’s image of water districts as
“Communism and confiscation under guise of law.” 11 Such language
suggests these taxes were viewed as progressive, and the history of
irrigation shows they were indeed the weapon of small farmers against
large.22

It is quite a wrench to shift from this historical perspective to the
modern image of the property tax as regressive. But times have
changed, and even the modern examples could be exceptional and
atavistic. Also, today we have the income tax as a reference datum.
Allegations of property tax regressivity usually imply a contrast with
the income tax, lacking in Madison’s day and weak in Seligman’s.
Current and recurrent proposals for property tax relief entail substi-
tuting income tax (and other state and federal tax) revenues for property
taxes. To meet the argument in its strongest general form, therefore,
we must compare property and income.

To define and narrow the issue I am making, I here define the prop-
erty tax as one levied at a uniform rate on the base of the capital value
of property as revealed by the current market. This is a property tax

10H. D. Simpson, “Historical Development of the Property Tax from the
Tegal Viewpoint,” American Economic Review (September, 1939), pp. 457-
67, p. 462. -
11 Fallbrook v. Bradley, 1895, 164 U.S. 112.
12 Albert Henley, “Land Value Taxation by California Irrigation Dis-
tricts,” in A. Becker (ed.), Land and Building Taxes (Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 1969), pp. 137-46.
PROPERTY TAXATION 411

reduced to its essence, stripped of the regressivity that may result from
maladministration and Balkanization, which are not the issues I raise
here because they are not peculiar to the property tax. Maladminis-
tration often entails regressive assessment, a serious problem. But all
taxes are applied regressively, and for about the same unhappy reasons
related to legal costs and financing politics. The income tax may be
the worst administered of the lot, in this respect. It is an unbalanced
literature that would compare a badly run property tax with an ideal-
ized income tax.

As to Balkanization, this is not inherent in the property tax as such,
but in local taxation as such. A local income tax similarly lets tax
havens attract the rich by low rates. Wisconsin municipalities, indeed,
have a local income tax (state-collected and returned). Since the rates
are common, regressivity takes the indirect form of higher services and
lower local property taxes in the favored enclaves, but it is nonetheless
a feature of local income taxation. California, on the other hand, may
move to a statewide property tax in response to the recent state Su-
preme Court decision, bringing in to finance education not only the
property of Emeryville and the Cities of Commerce and Industry, but
also rich, undertaxed farm, timber, recreational, and above all, mineral-
bearing real estate.

To hang the tax enclave problem on the property tax as such would,
therefore, be an example of the fallacy of identification, one which I
seek to avoid here by focusing on property value — the idealized tax
base — rather than collections.

Today’s common concept of regressivity owes much to an early work
by Musgrave, Carroll, Cook, and Frane.18 Their selection of data
sources, assumptions, concepts and methods set a pattern followed in
many later studies which repeated the general finding, with individual
variations. It is my thesis that the finding is inherent in the sources,
assumptions, concepts and methods, not in the subject. To demon-
strate this I make four points: property ownership is much more
concentrated than income; the property tax is not primarily shifted
forward, as assumed; the studies commit basic errors of correlation
analysis with systematic biases toward their conclusion; and the studies
misdefine both income and property, again with systematic bias toward
their finding. :

A. Property Ownership Is More Concentrated Than Income

To begin, a large share of the adult population — half, as a rough
measure — are renters and own no meaningful value of taxable prop-

13 “Distribution of Tax Payments by Income Groups: A Case Study for
1948,” IV, National Tax Journal (1): 1-53, March, 1951. For a list of others
see Dick Netzer, Economics of the Property Tax (Washington, D.C., Brook-
ings Institution, 1966), pp. 247 ff., and the Netzer book itself, Chap. III.
412 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

erty at all. Most of these essentially propertyless adults do earn tax-
able wage income. (We consider later whether property taxes are
shifted onto them.)

Savings rise with income, faster than income. With savings one
acquires property, and we would naturally expect therefore higher in-
come groups to own property in proportion to their greater saving,
which is a disproportionately high share of their high incomes. And
we would also expect a high share of high incomes to come from
property.

Musgrave et al: support this. They rank 1948 U.S. “Spending Units”
by income and group them, using Treasury sources of data. The
highest class got 23% of the income, but 78% of dividend income and
45% of rental income, and only 12% of the wage and salary income.!*
Other sources might be cited, too.

Musgrave et al. omitted capital gains. These are probably the most
concentrated source of income, and of course property-derived. Real-
ized gains swell from virtually nothing at the $10,000 income level to
about half of income at the million dollar level.15 Unrealized accrued
gains, which we should include in a proper Haig-Simons income con-
cept, are probably larger yet, and more concentrated. There are no
easy data on this, but several @ priori and indirect reasons to think
them concentrated. The rich have a comparative advantage in waiting
for deferred cash. They are known to favor growth stocks, undis-
tributed profits, speculative landholdings and unripe minerals, major
sources of unrealized accruals.

Among those who do own material amounts of property, concen-
tration is high relative to that of income. The top 10% of income
receivers, as income is usually defined and reported, get about 30% of
all income. Every study of property owners shows figures in another
ballpark altogether. Table 1 summarizes what several such studies
show about the top group. Note that most of these figures show only
concentration among those who own enough property to be counted,
thus understating concentration among the whole population.

Wealth is measured by value in all cases except where acreage is
specified (rows 4,5). Here, some will object that the acreage measure
overstates concentration, on the premise that large holdings of acreage
are below average in unit value. But even if they are, to accept that
objection from this premise would be a splendid case of regression
fallacy. When we move to the value measurement we must rerank
the owners on the new basis, and the new top group would consist in
part of different individuals. And there is no way to know whether
the new top group would have a higher or lower share, short of actu-

14 Musgrave, et al., op. cit., Table 1, p. 11.
15 Business Week, March 29, 1969, p. 96, “Making the Burden More
Equal,” citing the Brookings Institution.
PROPERTY TAXATION 413

ally reranking, regrouping, and recounting.

Most data sources don’t do this for us, but a few such comparisons
may be found. A special U.S. Census study of the ownership of rented
farms in 1900 measured them both by area and land value. By area,
the top 45% had 83%. By value, the top 45% had 85%.18 In 1951
Danish farming: by area, the top 2% had 14%; by value, the top 1.3%
had 14%.17 For Milwaukee industrial real estate, J ranked firms in
‘1960 by both land area and land value (my mass appraisal). By area,
the top 10% had 75%; by land value, 76%. For the Milwaukee CBD
(east side) 1968, I ranked owners by area and land assessment (City
Tax Commissioner’s appraisal). By area, the top 10% had 48%; by
assessed value, 60%. (Preliminary, subject to adjustment.)

These scraps of evidence show there is no presumption that acreage
rankings overstate concentration of wealth as a general rule, although
they doubtless do in some regions.

Corporate shares are not taxable property, but of course corporate
income is mostly derived from taxable property.18 Some will object
that corporations have many owners and should not be treated as single
units. That is true, but again, it smacks of regression fallacy. Wealthy
owners also have many corporations, and in general corporate shares
are the most concentrated kind of asset.

Ownership of large property gives one control of other assets. Prop-
erty is borrowing power and credit rating: all studies show interest
rates to be very regressive with size and quality of collateral, and terms
easier. But simple borrowing is only the beginning. With great wealth
one goes into banking and exerts multiple leverage. The story has
been told many times, if not as well, since Brandeis’ Other Peoples’
Money: collateral, leverage, conglomerates, interlocking directorates,
mergers, lender suasion, industrial leadership, pyramiding, the Wallen-
berg Grip, subcontracting market power, control of dealerships, ... .
Control is power and status (psychic income), and control is a source
of additional income, as revealed by the premium prices of shares dur-
ing battles for control.

Data in Table 1 probably understate concentration, for four general
reasons: omitting the unpropertied, accepting and reporting regressive
assessments, accepting the bias in partial inventories, and accepting and
reporting straw owners as separate owners.

1. Omitting the unpropertied. Few families have no income, so
income data cover most people. Many have too little property to
count, however, so many studies omit them. General asset ownership

16 U.S. Census of Agriculture 1900, Part I, pp. xc, xcii.

17 Danmark’s Statistik Arbog, 1953, p. 50.

18 For an exegesis on this point, cf. the writer’s “Adequacy of Land as a
Tax Base,” in Daniel Holland (ed.), The Assessment of Land Value (Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1970).
414 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

TaBLE t.-—Share of Wealth Held by Top Wealthholders

% of % of
Holders Wealth
Investigator Kind of Wealth in Top in Top
Group(s) Group(s)
USS. Estates, 1926 0.1 8.5
FIC ® US. Estates, 1926 2.5 46
Smith and Calvert > USS. Wealth, 1958 1 24
Lampman ¢ U.S. Wealth, 1961 1 28
U.S. Census 4 U.S. Farm Acreage, 1949 2.3 43
R, Nader et al.e Calif. Acreage, 1971 <.01 13.5
M. Gaffney t Milwaukee, CBD, east side,
assessed value, 1968 10 60
M. Gaffney & Milwaukee Industrial Real 10 89
Estate, assessed value,
1960 1 59
Same, land area 10 75
TNEC 4 U.S. Corporate Shares 3 50
Crockett and Friend! U.S. Corporate 0.1 20
. Shares, 1960 1 - 50
Judiciary Comm.,

USS. Senate J Shares of GM, 1956 <.01 33
Lydall and Lansing * U.S. Net Worth, 1953 10 56
US.D.I1 Federal Coal Leases,

773,000 acres, 1970 10 holders 49

4U.S. Federal Trade Commission, National Wealth and Income, Senate
Doc. No. 126, 1926, p. 59.

>bJames Smith and Staunton Calvert, “Estimating the Wealth of Top
Wealth-holders from Estate Tax Returns,” American Statistical Association,
1965 froceedings of the Business and Economic Statistical Section, Table 5,
p. 258.

¢ Robert Lampman, The Share of the Top Wealth Holders in National
Wealth (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962), updated to 1961 by
Lampman in Business Week, “Rich Get Richer — but not for Long,” Janu-
ary 27, 1962, p. 31.

41950 U.S. Census of Agriculture, Vol. 2, Ch. 10, p. 775.

¢ Robert Fellmeth (ed.), “Power and Land in California” (Washington:
Center for Study of Responsive Law (1971)), Preliminary Draft (mimeo),
Vol. I, p. 1-17.

£Data taken from City of Milwaukee assessment rolls and ranked by
Patricia Bevic, research assistant.

8 I ranked 626 City of Milwaukee industrial firms by assessed value, using
data collected by Norbert Stefaniak. .

h Temporary National Economic Committee, Monograph 29, Distribution
of Ownership of the Largest 200 Non-financial Corps. (Washington: GPO,
1940), pp. 37 ff. and Monograph 30, Survey of Shareholders in 1710 Corps.,

50

“i James Crockett and Erwin Friend, “Characteristics of Stock Owner-
PROPERTY TAXATION 415

studies use the estate-multiplier technique. Here the minimum is
$60,000. Corporate shareholder data omit most people, because most
own no stock. Farm data omit hired labor, treat tenants as owners,
and say nothing about former ’croppers now crowded in city ghettos.

My Milwaukee CBD data are in percentage terms relating only to
other owners. But the whole east side area studied has only 401
owners of record, while some hundred thousand people work and pay
sales taxes there.

2. Accepting regressive assessments as fact. Regressive assessment
is not universal, but some kinds of property are systematically assessed
regressively and, if not overtly, at least openly enough so assessors
under questioning do not deny but explain and defend the practice.
Unsubdivided land in large tracts is usually given a lower assessed
unit value, specifically because the holding is large. The result may
be seen by ranking Milwaukee industries by value of land (estimated
from reported area adjusted by mass appraisal technique). The top
10% have 76% of the land value, but only 61% of the assessed land
value. Thus the Table 1 datum, based on assessed value (of land
and buildings), probably understates concentration.

This factor also affects findings of studies using U.S. Treasury data.
For IRS practice gives weight to locally assessed values in appraisals
for Federal estate and income taxation. The notion that malassess-
ment only affects local taxes is a myth. a

Another factor is the watering of prices charged to the poor in and
around ghettos. A speculator often buys cheap and sells for what
looks like a huge markup. But the buyer has no cash. The seller
takes his profit in an inflated and risky second trust, which he quickly
sells at a large discount. The sage assessor knows how to dehydrate
watered prices if he wants to, but there is pressure to maintain tax
revenues from these areas, often resulting in watered assessments on
the poor.

Of course, if property assessments are regressive, property taxes are
based on them anyway, not on true values. But I distinguish tax con-
cept from tax administration, as noted. This is important for policy.

ship,’ American Statistical Association, 1963 Proceedings, reported in Mil-
waukee Sentinel, September 18, 1963.

i Bigness and Concentration of Economic Power — a Case Study of Gen-
eral Motors. Staff Report, Subcommittee on Antitrust and Monopoly,
Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, 84th Cong., Ist Sess. (Washing-
ton: GPO, 1956), p. 7.

k Harold Lydall and John Lansing, ‘A Comparison of the Distribution of
Personal Income and Wealth in the U.S. and Gt. Britain,” AER 49 (I):
43-67 (March 1959), (using data from University of Michigan Survey of
Consumer Finance).

1U.S. Department of the Interior, “Working Paper” (unpublished), cited
in Milwaukee Journal, August 29, 1971.
416 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

A regressively conceived tax remains regressive under the best of man-
agement. If the property tax is progressive in essential concept, then
it needs reform and new life rather than the gas chamber.

Regressive assessment is usually explained by assessors on grounds
of regressive use of property. Large holdings are generating less ac-
tivity per dollar of value. In Oregon, for example, larger timber hold-
ings are overtly assessed lower with the rationale they are worth less
because of the owners’ slower cutting schedule. But note this says
activity-based taxes (sales and income) are then less progressive than
property taxes. Thus the very explanation of regressive assessment is
a phenomenon that shows the property tax, properly administered, to
be progressive relative to income and sales taxes.

3. The bias in partial inventories. Any wealth inventory short of
universal will usually understate concentration because larger holders
.are more diversified. The largest owners in one city, region, industry,
or other class are most likely to have holdings outside the class.

As to housing, it is the rich who have second homes, hobby farms,
summer resorts, tax shelters, ski houses, Caribbean hideaways, lake
frontage, and advance sites for future building. Yet studies of income
-and housing, from which some would damn the property tax, compare
a full statement of income (at least wage income) with housing nar-
rowly defined. Walter Morton (p. 143) goes so far as to judge the
entire property tax on the basis of housing alone. He not only omitted
second homes, but other property comprising half the total: commerce,
industry, rental, vacant, farm, forest, mineral, water, and miscellaneous.
Again, ownership of these is concentrated among those ranking high
in the housing scale.

Studies of foreign-owned farms in America have shown them to be
larger than owner-occupied holdings. The 1900 Census of Agriculture
(a high water mark in good government statistics) reported on farm
landlords. In-county landlords averaged 85 acres; out-of-county but
in-state landlords, 126 acres; out-of-state but U.S. landlords, 159 acres.
Foreign landlords were highest of all. 28% of them held over 2500
acres, while only 10% of U.S. landlords did.19 I take this to be a
universal tendency, deducible @ priori from the fact that it doesn’t pay
to range far abroad to invest only a small sum. As U.S. residents
change from colonials into the world’s absentee owners, this universal
tendency is clear. It is our largest oil firms, the international majors,
who cover the entire U.S. with marketing and the world with mineral
holdings. The largest holdings in any one jurisdiction, industry, or
other narrow class of property, thus are usually owned by those with
large holdings outside. With every passing year of mergers and con-
glomeration this grows more true.

19 1900 Census of Agriculture, Part 1, p. xc.
PROPERTY TAXATION 417

Thus my data on Milwaukee’s CBD understate concentration. The
third largest holder on the west side there for example is the Schlitz
Company, yet the area omits the brewery that made Milwaukee famous,
millions of dollars in the controlling family’s vast speculative suburban
landholdings, and large worldwide interests. Smaller owners have out-
side interests too, but on the whole are less diversified.

Again, the data on industry take no account that the large firms
either have or are branch plants. Increasingly they are merged into
conglomerates. In Wisconsin, Udell finds recent conglomeration has
resulted in large drops in activity-based income taxes from the merged
properties. Conglomeration is partly motivated, indeed, to avoid in-
come taxes. That means the corporate income tax is regressive in
practice.?°

Many popular recent studies omit all property but housing, follow-
ing Walter Morton. The better studies, as by Musgrave and Netzer;
avoid this outright blunder. But wide currency and credibility have
gone recently to a study by Daniel Lucas for the D.C. Government,
based entirely on housing — first home only — and hypothetical hous-
ing at that.21_ The Wisconsin Department of Revenue released a study
in May “in defense of Governor Lucey’s use of the income tax to
provide property tax relief” with the same blunder.2? This study
follows the precedent of a 1959 release by the University of Wisconsin
School of Commerce.?%

Many writers exempt corporate shares from taxable wealth, faulting
the property tax for not reaching such “intangibles.” Yet most cor-
porate assets are very tangible at a price. In most jurisdictions the
largest property taxpayers are corporations.24 Studies based on indi-
vidual ownership alone and omitting corporate wealth are simply not
relevant. ;

A large genre of partial inventories is the farm study, of which every
Agricultural Experiment Station must have issued one or more. Hardly
anyone wealthy enough to own a large farm today lacks nonfarm in-
come. One cannot afford to keep a large farm without using it as an
income tax shelter — that is the “highest and best use” under our in-
come tax law. Studies purporting to compare “farm income” with
farm property taxes are founded on the obsolete premise that “farmers”
are a separate class of people, and have no value.

20Jon Udell, Social and Economic Consequences of the Merger Move-
ment in Wisconsin (Madison: Bureau of Business Research, 1969).

21D. Lucas, “Major Tax Burdens in Washington Compared With Those
in the 25 Largest Cities,” D.C. Government, press release, December 1970.

22 Milwaukee Journal, May 25, 1971.

23 University of Wisconsin Tax Study Commission, Wisconsin’s State and
Local Tax Burden (Madison: University of Wisconsin School of Commerce,
1959).

24M. Mason Gaffney, loc. cit..
418 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

4. Accepting straw owners as separate owners. Large land assem-
blies are habitually arranged through straw owners. Thus one large
owner often appears on records as several small ones. The Milwaukee
CBD study, as reported, is premised on one certain block’s having
several separate owners, as recorded. Some time after the First Wis-
consin Bank announced it was building on the assembled site,25 we
did not find it listed as owner.26 Nor did we find Northwestern Mutual
Life listed for more than its home office, although Gordon Davidson,
director of real estate, stated the company had been acquiring land in
our area “over the years.” 27 Small owners, on the other hand, are
not likely to appear as large ones. Wealthy families wear several
guises: banks, insurance companies, corporations, estates, utilities, etc.
Property is assigned to children and relatives to split income. Rarely
are these veils pierced by formal quantitative studies. Even the ICC
has never found out who owns the-railroads. But we can be quite
certain ownership is held more closely in fact than on paper.

B. The Property Tax is not Primarily Shifted Forward

With a base so concentrated, it requires some creative methods to
find the property tax regressive. One is to assume general forward
shifting. Then the property owner is exempt, exempt as a homeowner.
Tenants do not escape. No one does. The property tax becomes a
general consumption tax, and therefore regressive. I submit several
reasons why the property tax is not shifted forward.

1, All studies have greatly understated the share of land in real
estate value. Some overlook it altogether. The good ones assign it
a value, and allow for nonshifting, but the value is much too low.
They-are all pre-Douglas Commission Report, and rendered obsolete
by Manvel’s study of how high a share land values are.28 Manvel’s
study plus my Milwaukee study plus Gustafson’s California data
support a land share of 40% and up, much higher than the 15% or so
used by Musgrave et al. At present the assessed value of land is
40-50% of the total in Washington, D.C., California, and some other
jurisdictions that have updated assessments.

It is true that in most jurisdictions land is underassessed, and Mus-
grave’s numbers were reasonable in their day as a statement of what
assessors were doing. As noted, however, maladministration should
be blamed on administrators, not on the property tax per se. And
Musgrave omitted three important points.

25 Milwaukee Sentinel, February 14, 1969.

26 Report by Patricia Bevic, Research Assistant, March, 1969.

‘27 Milwaukee Sentinel, February 14, 1969.

28 Allen D. Manvel, “Trends in the Value of Real Estate and Land, 1956-
66,” in National Committee on Urban Problems, Three Land Research
Studies, Research Report #12 (Washington: GPO, 1968), pp. 1-17.
PROPERTY TAXATION 419

One, the share of land in real estate tends to rise with value of
holdings.2° So nonshiftability of the property tax rises with wealth.

Two, the share of land in real estate is lowest in owner-occupied
residences, where the shifting assumption has no effect on progressivity.
The land share is highest, normally over half, in commerce, where
the assumption is critical. In Milwaukee, 40% of all retail land space
is in gas stations! The property tax on downtown and other retail
landowners with wide parking lots in good locations is one of the
most progressive imaginable, but Musgravian assumptions convert it
into a regressive sales tax.

Three, taxes on land actually have some positive effect on supply.
.They are not simply neutral, but apply leverage prompting earlier and
more intensive use of land. To assume non-shifting understates their
impact on landowners. They weaken his market position vis-a-vis
non-owners, making them doubly progressive. This is @ fortiori true
of mineral bearing lands. Here, property tax critics often forecast
panic liquidation if rates rise. They overdraw the point, but there is
a point there, and it is in the reverse of forward shifting.

2. Taxes on buildings are not mostly shifted forward. There is
no reason to assume forward shifting of taxes on capital, and I find no
persuasive rationale in Musgrave et al.,/or Morton. Netzer mug-
wumps the issue.

To be simply shifted forward, a tax would have to be proportional
to output. Taxes on capital are not proportional to output, but to one
input. They fall differentially hard on capital intensive firms and
industries, which could not recoup from customers without raising
prices relative to labor-intensive competitors. Capital-intensity varies
over a very wide range — see any issue of Fortune’s annual analysis
of the top 500 corporations. And it is the large firms that own more
capital per unit of output. That is, the use of property is regressive,
so that activity-based taxes are regressive relative to taxes on capital.
Even if there be some tendency toward forward shifting it would be
very uneven, the more capital-intensive firms being less able to shift.

But of alternative shifting hypotheses, forward shifting seems the
least likely. It would only make sense if the tax were levied on one
industry, exempting others, thus reducing supply and raising real price.
But the property tax is a general tax on capital. It cannot be analyzed
with tools of partial equilibrium. It chases capital out of capital-
intensive and into labor-intensive uses. The tax on buildings (not on
land) encourages Jand-intensive use, too, i.e. a low capital/land ratio.

Where we go from here depends on what we are analyzing. If it is

29 President’s Commission on Urban Housing, Report on Urban Housing
(Washington: GPO, 1968), p. 351; M. Gaffney, “Land Speculation,” unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, 1956, pp. 210-17; 1940

Census of Agriculture, Vol. 3, p. 80; R. Hurd, Principles of City Land
Values (New York: Record and Guide, 1902), p. 102.
420 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

an open economy like the typical local taxing body, then wage rates
and interest rates are fixed exogenously, leaving only land to bear any
local tax. The local tax on capital thus is largely shifted to land. The
shifting is differential, owing to different capital/land ratios; and
density is reduced. But the point here is that the tax is not shifted
off property and is not made regressive.

If it is federal revenue-sharing we analyze, the rules change. Now
the proposal would affect property taxes nationwide. Here we cannot
assume that interest and wage rates are fixed exogenously.

In a completely closed economy, capital should bear most of: the
tax on capital. If it cannot emigrate, its escape routes are limited to
dissaving and tax-exempt public works. Supply being fairly inelastic,
capital has to accept a lower rate of return after taxes. If capital
did not absorb the tax, the tax rate added to the pre-tax interest rate
would drive capital out of capital-intensive and into labor-intensive
uses. In the latter it complements labor, raising demand for labor,
preventing a shift of the tax to labor.

But the U.S. economy is not entirely closed. Capital now emigrates,
not without cost, but more freely than labor. Thus the position of
capital vis-a-vis labor is stronger than in a completely closed economy,
and labor does suffer from the tax. But the position vis-a-vis land is
strong too. So the capital tax as a national institution is borne by land
and capital and labor, all three. Thus property still bears much, and
probably most of the capital tax.80 Remember now, that the other
half of the property tax falls directly on land and stays. Putting it all
together, it seems most likely that the property tax is indeed largely
what it purports to be, a tax on property.

The case for forward shifting is’ strongest with utilities, and rails,
not for analytical but institutional reasons. Here, however, a simple
forward shift would only result if we took regulatory piety at face
value, as no one does who really looks into the matter. We cannot
develop that here. But note that the rate required to attract capital
into utilities is lowered by taxes on non-utility property. Thus: in-
directly, if regulation works at all, utilities bear the property tax too,
at least in part.

The case for forward shifting seems weak with timber, livestock,
and all appreciating capital in the short run, since it hastens liquidation.

30 Adding the property tax rate to the interest rate affects the allocation
of new investments in much the same way as raising interest rates by the
amount of the property tax rate. This forces capital into labor-intensive
forms, moderating the damage to labor by increasing demand for labor.
Saving capital also involves substituting land, but this is tightly limited,
because using more private land would require more social overhead capital
(like longer streets). And saving capital entails lowering longevity of capi-
tal, which substitutes labor for land, as explained by Wicksell in Value,
Capital and Rent.
PROPERTY TAXATION 421

But this is only short run, and a partial analysis. In the long run the
tax drives capital out of capital-intensive uses. The case is really
weak where cartels are engaged in underutilizing capital or land —
the common condition according to students of industrial organiza-
tion. These holding actions are extremely vulnerable to the property
tax. Far from being shifted forward, the tax forces idle capital and
land into use, increasing supply and lowering prices. All cartels are
characterized by excess capacity — that is of the essence. When you
consider that half the wells in Texas are surplus — need I go on?
In a cartelized society like ours the forward shifting thesis is not just
shaky but ludicrous. Untaxing property, as by revenue sharing, would
strengthen the hand of every cartel now locking up excess capacity.
It is not the property tax but the lack of one that would be shifted
forward in higher prices.

C. The Need to Correct for Regression Fallacy,
or Which Top 10% Do You Mean?

Most studies of property tax regressivity stumble squarely into the
pratfall of regression fallacy. The problem in brief is this. Income
and property are positively related but the scatter of points is loose,
with great individual residuals from any fitted curve, and a high error
of estimate. We want to know which rises faster as they rise together.
The answer depends on which we arbitrarily select as the ranking vari-
able. Let us say we rank by income on the abscissa and find the top
10% have 30% of the income and 25% of the property (a hypothetical
number). It looks as though the property tax is regressive. But now
rank them by property on the ordinate. The top 10% are now a dif-
ferent group —- we have taken a stratum of points at right angles to
the original column. Some of the humble have been exalted, and the
mighty laid low. This top 10% has say 50% of the property and 25%
of the incomé, and the property tax looks progressive (in terms of
income) .31

When the Census of Housing ranks families by income, rent pay-
ments do not keep up with income.®? But ranking them by value of
dwelling units, value quintuples while income only doubles.38 That is
the difference a technical detail or two can make.

So which top 10% do we mean? Most studies have uncritically

31 Good discussions of regression fallacy are in Allen Wallis and Harry
Roberts, Statistics (Glencoe: The Free Press, 1956), preceding p. 263;
Lawrence Klein, Introduction to Econometrics (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-
Hall, 1962), pp. 68-69; George Stigler, ‘Labor Productivity and Size of
Farm: A Statistical Pitfall,” Journal of Farm Economics 28: 821-25 (1946);
and A. E. Waugh, Elements of Statistical Method (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1943), pp. 387-89. :

32 U.S. Census of Housing, 1960, Table A-3.

33 Op. cit., Table B-3, p. 14.

a
~~

rh

422 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

chosen income as the proper ranking variable, by assumption, thus
practically preordaining the conclusion — and largely invalidating it. °

The Chicago school of permanent income hypothesizers have counter-
attacked sharply on the housing salient. Margaret Reid 94 undertook
to narrow the scatter of points by removing random year-to-year in-
come changes. She related housing to a definition of permanent
income, and came up with income-elasticity of demand for housing
well above unity.

One of Reid’s methods of avoiding regression fallacy was the inter-
area comparison, where data are grouped by a neutral variable (neigh-
borhood) which is neither housing nor income. Brodsky has repeated
this for Census Tracts of the District of Columbia. His findings strike
me because he is a geographer who is not concerned with the perma-
nent income or regressivity question and presents his findings just as
interesting facts. He finds residential improvement values rise with the
1.3 power of income; land values rise with the 1.8 power.3%

Muth has refined and expanded Reid’s methods. He now suggests
1.2 or 1.3 as correct income-elasticities of demand for housing.26 Lee
has criticized Reid’s methods and come up with an elasticity of about
-81. However, Lee’s data were too small a sample to lean on heavily,
and more important they excluded land.37 We have seen that land is
the most progressive share of housing, so this biases Lee’s findings
downwards.

Another needed correction is the treatment of realized capital gains.
Say an asset rises slowly for twenty years and is sold. In the year of
sale, reported income is high, but property taxes are normal or fall.
In the first 19 years there were property taxes and no reported income.
This creates a statistical illusion of regressivity. If accrual of value
were treated as current income, the illusion would be dispelled.

Another needed correction is the treatment of normal life-cycles of
accumulation and liquidation. It is normal for the retired elderly to
draw on savings in years of low income, and get help from children,
if needed, to hang onto property the children will inherit. The prop-
erty tax which has not been regressive in a lifetime sense looks regres-
sive when no correction is made for this statistical illusion.

But these are only glancing blows. The central question is, why
rank by income at all — any concept of income? When we do that
we accept income-fundamentalism, a kind of philosophical imperialism

962 M. Reid, Housing and Income (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1962).

35 H. Brodsky, “Residential Land and Improvement Values in a Central
City,” Land Economics 46 (3): 229-47 (August 1970), p. 239.

36 R. Muth, “Permanent Income, Instrumental Variables, and the Income
Elasticity of Housing Demand” (MS, n.d., ca. 1971, pp. 1-40).
' 87 Tong Lee, “Housing and Permanent Income,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 50 (4): 480-90 (November 1968), p. 487.
PROPERTY TAXATION 423

where Adjusted Gross Income on Form 1040 is the basic reference
datum against which to measure and judge everything. “Similar cir-
cumstances” mean similar AGI, and similar circumstances deserve
similar taxes. In effect this means we judge the property tax on the
basis of how closely it resembles the income tax, in every detail. Since
nothing resembles the income tax so much as the income tax, the prop-
erty tax looks inferior.

Again, the concept called “income-elasticity of demand for wealth”
contains implicit income —Chauvinism. It implies one-way causa-
tion: income causes wealth. But wealth also causes income, and as
Klein points out that changes the rules for relating them.38 No longer
can income be the simple ranking variable.

If the property tax had no rationale of its own we would be forced
to accept income fundamentalism. But if the property tax has a
rationale, then it is legitimate to rank by wealth, and fault the income
tax for failing to tax large properties adequately. Here is an outline
rationale for the property tax.

1. “Ability-to-pay” derives from wealth as well as current income.
James Tobin, Arnold Zellner, Taylor and Houthakker, Harold Somers,
and others have stressed this lately. The old cliche that “taxes are
paid out of income” is as empty as the one that we consume “out of
income.” We spend money, and it is not labelled.

2. The property tax asserts a public equity in land which was won
and is defended by joint efforts, and whose value derives from public
works and spillovers, not from the owner’s efforts. It exempts human
effort, thus rewarding service to the community and denying the state
any equity in the bodies of its citizens whose freedom and dignity is
thus enhanced in their capacity as human beings, as distinct from
owners of wealth.

3. Property taxes reduce the differential effect of inherited wealth
on the current generation. They strike directly at concentration of
economic and other power based on wealth, promoting competition
and equal opportunity. Property as collateral is a source of invisible
income (credit rating). Taxing property reduces the differential ad-
vantage of the rich in credit rationing.

4, Property income of a given dollar value places the receiver on a
higher welfare plane than labor income, because he needn’t work for it.
$10,000 a year received by dint of working long hours in a coal mine
with black lung disease is not the same as $10,000 plus a life of ease.

5. The property tax is needed to plug loopholes in the income tax,
which is inexorably devolving into a payroll tax.

If one finds that rationale compelling, then the proper approach is
to rank by wealth. Doing so, one finds that property is used regres-

38 Klein, op. cit., p. 68.
ay

ns

424 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

sively, i.e., the larger holdings generate less taxable sales and income
per dollar of wealth. Thus in the Milwaukee industries reported in
Table 1, ranking by value, the top 10% who have 89% of the value
have only 69% of the employees.

If one likes the property tax rationale partly but not wholly, then
he may follow Wallis and Roberts 3° who tell us that to avoid regres-
sion fallacy a valid way to compare two populations is to compare
their standard deviations or other measure of variability. If there is
less income than property in the upper groups, the variability of the
income distribution will be less. But we have already seen that is so
(Table 1). Table 1 only gives the top group, but in each case I have
computed Gini (or Lorenz concentration) ratios for the entire distri-
bution, and they are as you would expect much higher than for in-
come. (The Gini ratio is, in my experience, closely correlated with
the coefficient of dispersion.)

The more we correct for regression fallacy, then, the more progres-
sive the property tax looks.

D. On Defining Income and Wealth

Dick Netzer, like others, uses AGI as the reference standard against
which to match the property tax and find it regressive.4#® A certain
citizen in 1970 reported no AGI, but heavy property taxes, which
might make the property tax quite regressive were it not Ronald Reagan.
Yet he is not alone, and it seems harsh to select a measure that makes
the property tax regressive because it is the only tax many rich men
pay. General Oppenheimer has written a fine set of manuals on how
to reach Zero AGI by losing money farming,*1 and they work so well
that taxable farm income is down to about $3 billions while the USDA
estimates farm income at $14 billions.42 I do not think that AGI
will do.

It is not just farming. Property is the paramount tax shelter. How
does it cover thee? Let me count the ways. There is expensing of
intangibles and soil and water conservation, percentage depletion, capi-
tal gains rates, deferred realization, non-distribution of profits, non-
realization, conversion of interest into cost recovery by watered sales
prices, accelerated depreciation, multiple depreciation, de facto expen-
sing of capital improvements, deduction of interest, covert write-off of

39 Op. cit., p. 263.

40 Op. cit., p. 49.

41H. L. Oppenheimer, Cowboy Economics, 1966; Cowboy Litigation,
1968; Cowboy Arithmetic, 1964 (Danville, Illinois: Interstate Printers and
Publishers).

42 Hendrik S. Houthakker, “The Great Farm Tax Mystery,” Challenge,
January and February, 1967, pp. 12-13 and 38-39; Edward Reinsel, Farm
and Off-farm Income Reported on Federal Tax Returns, ERS-383 (Wash-
ington: GPO, 1968).
PROPERTY TAXATION 425

undepreciated land value, deferral of tax beyond date of sale, and
many others.

At the same time, property is a large source of income that is not
counted in AGI. Unrealized accruals and imputed income are the
most obvious, and each is a huge item.

’ Thus the ownership of property tends on a large scale to reduce AGI
and increase real income. When we rank by AGI, property owners
move into lower brackets than they belong; non-owners move into
higher brackets. Property tax payments move into the lower brackets,
pre-ordaining a finding of regressivity which is totally illusory.

At least two studies have sought to correct for the Reagan Effect.
Both corrected only partially, and with spectacular results. The Sur-
vey Research Center made the tax progressive simply by including
imputed income.4* Brainin and Germanis do a similar job with Cali-
fornia data.44

Another common method is to define property tax payments as only
the net burden after deducting payments from taxable income. This
is to impute a regressive feature of the income tax to the property tax.
That would be wrong at best, but more so when one is comparing the
property tax with the income tax itself.

If one does choose to evaluate the two taxes jointly, he should note
above all that the Federal Government has moved far toward aban-
doning the taxation of property income. That is the cumulative effect
of a hundred loopholes, available to property but not to the poor stiff
with his W-2 Form. Equity suggests that state and local treasuries
move in on this unpreémpted tax base.

Definition of the property tax base is also a source of serious error
in a number of studies based on cash rents. Netzer for example as-
sumes that property taxes are proportional to rents. They aren’t.
The base is not rent but capital value. The poor live in declining
neighborhoods and buildings nearing abandonment, where capital value
is a very low multiple of rent. Rents include high costs for collection,
turnover, damage, loss of status, maintenance and repairs, and general
unpleasantness. In Milwaukee’s “Inner Core” or slum area the rule
of thumb is you pay 30 months’ rent to buy a dwelling unit. Tenant
incomes are low, but higher than such capital values. The rich live
in new buildings of long future life in appreciating neighborhoods.
Incomes are high, but normally less than half of lot or acreage plus
house values.

It is true that slums are often overassessed, but again, maladminis-

43 Survey Research Center, Income and Welfare in the U.S. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1962).

44 David Brainin and John J. Germanis, Comments on “Distribution of
Property, Retail Sales and Personal Income Tax Burdens in California: an

Empirical Analysis of Inequity in Taxation,” National Tax Journal, March
1967, pp. 106-112.

rareny
wt.

426 NATIONAL TAX ASSOCIATION

tration is the fault of administrators. The property tax in concept is
progressive precisely because it is based on capital value. Owners of
appreciating property often complain that capital value as a base hits
them harder than would current income or service flow as a base, and
they are right. That is precisely what makes the property tax, cor-
rectly administered, so progressive.
