The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0306-8293.htm

IJSE
36,4

328

Emerald

International Journal of Social
Economics

Vol. 36 No. 4, 2009

pp. 328-411

The hidden taxable capacity

of land: enough and to spare

Mason Gaffney
Department of Economics, University of California, Riverside, California, USA

Abstract

Purpose — A tax based on land value is in many ways ideal, but many economists dismiss it by
assuming it could not raise enough revenue. Standard sources of data omit much of the potential tax
base, and undervalue what they do measure. The purpose of this paper is to present more
comprehensive and accurate measures of land rents and values, and several modes of raising revenues
from them besides the conventional property tax.

Design/methodology/approach — The paper identifies 16 elements of land’s taxable capacity that
received authorities either trivialize or omit. These 16 elements come in four groups.

Findings — In Group A, Elements 1-4 correct for the downward bias in standard sources. In Group B,
Elements 5-10 broaden the concepts of land and rent beyond the conventional narrow perception, while
Elements 11-12 estimate rents to be gained by abating other kinds of taxes. In Group C, Elements 13-14
explain how using the land tax, since it has no excess burden, uncaps feasible tax rates. In Group D,
Elements 15-16 define some moot possibilities that may warrant further exploration.

Originality/value — This paper shows how previous estimates of rent and land values have been
narrowly limited to a fraction of the whole, thus giving a false impression that the tax capacity is low.
The paper adds 14 elements to the traditional narrow “single tax” base, plus two moot elements
advanced for future consideration. Any one of these 16 elements indicates a much higher land tax base
than economists commonly recognize today. Taken together they are overwhelming, and cast an
entirely new light on this subject.

Keywords Land rents, Property tax, Economic resources, Taxation, Depreciation, Tax burden
Paper type Research paper

1. Introduction

Scores of economists tell us that an ideal tax is one based on the value of land. A big
part of the benefit is getting rid of other taxes, taxes that impose “excess burdens” by
twisting incentives against the bases taxed. Then these economists abandon the point
by assuming land values are too low to support modern government, so forget the ideal
tax base.

Here, we examine their reasons for so assuming. It turns out that the revenue
potential of land is greater than almost anyone thinks. There is enough and to spare.
We find that conventional sources of data are seriously negligent and consistently
biased downwards. They omit much of the potential base and low-ball what they do
measure. Then we go on to identify and uncloset hidden elements of revenue potential,
by using truer and more comprehensive definitions and measures of rent and land
values, and several modes of raising public revenues from them.

Some other economists and pundits, at the same time, express the opposite concern.
They bridle at any land tax hike, even in a tax-cum-rebate proposal. It is just “feeding
the beast”, they say, fearing that this feast is too rich. Some even take both positions

Senet’ Croup Publishing Limited alternately, as Seligman did a century ago when he bent the twig of modern tax theory

DOI 10.1108/030682909 10947930

(Andelson and Gaffney, 1979). But here we just address the more common concern
whether land revenues have the capacity to replace other taxes, so we may sunset the
latter. We are looking at a “revenue-neutral” shift, to banish counterproductive taxes
on labor, production, dwellings, other capital, and commerce. In the process we will
specify ways to cut wasteful public spending by using private land better.

Beyond that we may or may not, as separate issues, want to add some “lean” to the
public sector to provide and maintain its crumbling infrastructure, a foundation of
the private sector. We may have to pay down our heavy public debts. Interest on those
debts now consumes a high fraction of public spending, and threatens to take more as
our international credit rating falls, as the dollar already has. We may want to raise
taxes to bail out underfunded existing obligations like social security, public health,
medical care, and public schools (or vouchers, as one prefers). We may or may not want
to distribute a social dividend in cash, on the Alaska model{1]. But again, each of those
is a separate issue not treated here.

Many modern champions of Georgist ideas have withdrawn into a corner, confining
themselves to modifying the existing local property tax by exempting buildings. Many
(not all) even shy away from demanding reform of moss-covered assessment rolls[2}.
They express concern at being branded as “cranks” if they would do more, and of
course, their opponents see this weakness and use it to cow them[3]. This timidity
narrows the prospective tax base to a small and shrinking part of the total system of
public revenues. I ask my readers to join me in exploring the whole system. It is not just
the property tax, narrowly conceived, that brims with Georgist issues.

There are at least 16 elements of land’s taxable capacity that previous researchers
have either trivialized, or overlooked and “disappeared” entirely. In Group A,
Elements 1-4 correct for the downward bias in standard data. In Group B, Elements

5-12 broaden the concepts of land and its rent far beyond the conventional narrow *

perception. This includes showing how the benefits of untaxing useful activity are
shifted into higher taxable land rents, a very powerful effect. In Group C, Elements
13-14 show how removing “excess burdens” uncaps viable tax rates. In Group D,
Elements 15 and 16 explore a moot idea on how mortgage interest might be treated as
rent; and on how taxing the rents of absentee owners improves a local balance of
payments.

The following table of contents shows how the four Groups and the 16 Elements
fit together, and reinforce each other. I urge the serious reader to refer back to this
table often, as the focus shifts from one Element to another of the total thesis.
The Elements are the trees; this is the forest.

2. Group A. How conventional data hide land rents and values

2.1 Element No. 1 Commonly used data sources

Conventional data sources understate land rents and values. Some omit them entirely.
These sources include the following.

2.1.1 Assessed valuations used for property taxation. There are many reasons
assessed land values usually fall far short of the market: at least 31 reasons, in fact.
Readers interested in them all will find them itemized in Appendix 1. Here, we give just
one of the 31 reasons, a most important and general one.

In dividing land and building values, most modern assessors fail to assess land first,
using maps, with building value as the “residual”. This simple matter, so easy to state

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

329

IJSE
36,4

330

briefly here and pass by, involves huge values, bleeding land value into building
value{4].

2.1.2 IRS data with rents zeroed out.

2.1.2.1 Cash rents offset by fictitious depreciation:

+ Fast write-off. Many economists rely on data generated by the IRS to infer the

sources of income in the USA. These data are bad because taken from tax
returns, where income from real estate is systematically concealed. For example,
landlords deduct alleged “depreciation” from their net operating rents (“cash
flow”) to arrive at taxable rents. They accelerate depreciation enough, usually, to
report little or no taxable rent. This is what the IRS then aggregates and reports
as the sum of all rents. It is fiction, but dozens of economists, when estimating
rents in the national accounts, take it as fact. Thus, they lend their authority to
the IRS, while the IRS’ “official” status legitimizes their work — a circular process
of transmuting lead into gold.

Multiple write-off. That would be bad enough if it happened only once in the life
of a building, but the understatement of national rent is much grosser. When
owner A has exhausted his tax “basis” by overdepreciating, he sells to B for a
price well above the remaining basis. B then depreciates the same building all
over again, then sells to C, who sells to D, and so on, so each building is
tax-depreciated several times during its economic life. In any one year many,
probably most of all rental buildings in the USA, are being depreciated, some for
the second, third, fourth, or fifth time. Since one-third of all Americans rent their
dwellings, and most businesses rent office or sales space, that is a lot of
unreported rent.

Depreciating land value. In addition, all owners after the original builder are in a
position to depreciate some of the land value as well, because the “allocation of
basis” between depreciable building and non-depreciable land is mostly in their
control. The IRS has no defense against this avoidance, because it has never
developed any capacity to value land by itself, and Congress has not mandated it.

The most that the IRS does, if it will not accept the filer’s claim, is to let him
cite the allocation used by his local assessor. These officers (with a few notable
exceptions), underassess land relative to buildings, by using the erroneous
“land-residual” method of dividing land from building value. This is partly to
accommodate their local constituents — assessors are locally elected or
appointed, and do not report to the IRS.

Exempting land income in perpetuity. To write off land only one time is to achieve
tax exemption in perpetuity. It means the Treasury has bought the right to tax
the land in the future. If income tax rates fall after the write-off, the Treasury has
bought at a high rate what it later taxes at a low rate. When the dollar keeps
losing real value, as it has and will, the write-off in hard dollars is repaid by taxes
in soft dollars.

Subsidizing owners for holding land. When the land is written off more than once
- and it is — taxation becomes negative. The Treasury each time is
re-Subsidizing people for holding land.

Converting ordinary income into capital gains. When A sells to B there is a large
excess of the sales price over the remaining or “undepreciated” basis. This excess
is taxable income. Taxing is called “recapture” of prior excess depreciation,
leaving an impression of equitable treatment. Congress has classed this kind of
income as a “capital gain.” Most rents, therefore, show up as capital gains, not as
rents. No economist or statistician, to my knowledge, has adjusted the data for
this, while proclaiming instead that “rents” are a low fraction of national income,
based on the “official” data.

* Undertaxing capital gains. Taxing these factitious “capital gains” is alleged to
“recapture” the earlier fast write-off, but the recapture is more nominal than real.
Capital gains are subject to a score of additional avoidance devices known to
every lawyer and accountant (Noyes, n.d; Gaffney, 1969, 1970b, 1991a, b),
including a tax rate capped at 15 percent today, and headed south if present
trends continue. So capital gains, too, are underreported, leaving little trace of the
rents they contain. Most economists today neglect this whole matter. Many of
them now are even claiming that capital gains are not income at all, making it
even easier to ignore them. Increasingly, writers and allied politicians are
referring to “the capital gains tax” as though it were something different from the
income tax, of which it is actually a part (in the USA).

2.1.2.2 Omitting imputed rents. The IRS reports nothing at all for the imputed income
of owner-occupied lands, because Congress has not made this kind of non-cash income
taxable as income. Local property taxes do tap it by taxing property values, but the
convention is not to label this as “income”, even though economists regard it as such.
Todd Sinai and Joseph Gyourko of the Wharton School reported aggregate “house”
values in the US in 1999 were $11.1 trillion. The annual rental value of that, figuring at
5 percent, would be roughly half a trillion dollars a year — quite a chunk to omit from
the rental portion of national income. We also know that the prices of lands for housing
have risen sharply since 1999, perhaps tripling before falling back after 2007, so that
$11.1 trillion may be $22.2 trillion now.

That means not just that the imputed annual value is double, but also that the net
worth of the owners rose by about $11.2 trillion, 1999-2008. Such silent gains are also a
form of income from land, unreported and almost entirely untaxed. This is not a
product of ignorance. Every homeowner knows she can realize the gain in cash by
borrowing on it, as so many have. A “line of credit” is a handy way, you just write a
check, and the gain is tax-free. She also knows she can defer any gains-tax on sale by
trading up, never down. She may also know of the “angel of death” provision: taxes on
accrued unrecognized gains are canceled forever when one dies. The heir starts from a
new enhanced “basis”, the appraised value at time of death. (For more on unrealized
gains, see Section 3.2.5.)

Sinai/Gyourko’s treatment is high-quality. Even they, however, write of the imputed
income of owner-occupied “housing,” exclusively. That is doubly misleading. First,
it emphasizes the house, the building, de-emphasizing the land. That is wrong because
the income proper imputable to the house, per se, is much less than its rent equivalent.
The house requires constant expenses for upkeep, heating, maintenance and repairs,
cleaning, painting, etc. The house also depreciates, physically, and obsolesces. Those
expenses and the depreciation/obsolescence must be deducted from the rental
equivalent to get the net income.

The land, that is the space and location, requires none of those expenses. Its rental
equivalent includes its entire net current income. It does not depreciate physically, and

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

331

IJSE
36,4

332

rarely obsolesces. Instead, it usually appreciates in value, and that annual increment is
also a current income. So the “imputed income of owner-occupied housing” is mostly
attributable to the land.

Second, to single out “housing” is misleading by omitting other lands that yield
imputed income. We may presume that “house” includes the land under it, and a little
yard or curtilage, but what about other lands held for the owners’ personal enjoyment?
No agency collects data on such lands and their values, but common observation tells
us they are vast and valuable. Gection 3.2.4).

2.1.23 Misposting internalized rents. Most amazingly, all the data sources
mentioned limit their measure of cash rent to explicit payments from tenant to
landlord. What about those landowners, be they proprietors or partnerships or
corporations or eleemosynaries or other organizations, managing their own lands? On
prime farmland in central Illinois, for example, a standard crop share is at least
50 percent for the landlord. Owner-operators do not give up that 50 percent share, they
take it directly and post it as part of profit. So do all the official data sources, and the
rent disappears.

When land is heavily mortgaged, the owner-operator doing his books may well
deduct interest from profit, so even profit disappears. Then the lenders become the de
facto recipients of the rent, but they post it as “interest”, and so do the official data
sources. At times like late 2007, when overextended sub-prime borrowers are missing
payments and defaulting on mortgage-backed debts, reality breaks through
temporarily as the pain reaches Wall Street. The lenders are the real owners.

2.1.3 “NIPA” data. The conventional sources of data on GNP and its components
are the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), kept and published regularly
by the US Department of Commerce. NIPA data is better than raw IRS data, in one
way, by virtue of its making a gesture, at least, at including the imputed value of
owner-occupied housing. Even these data omit, as noted in Section 2.1.2, other lands
yielding imputed income.

When it comes to cash rent, however, NIPA depends on IRS data, which thus are
passed along to all students of economics as the “official” accounting. We have seen
how far below reality these data are.

Major media still blame current bankruptcies on novel modern mortgage bundlers,
equity funds, program traders, and other froth on the waves, but we have suffered land
pullbacks before, over several centuries, under different sets of lending institutions.
The constant factor is the ebb of the land market underlying the froth. Keepers of the
national accounts, however, plod along impassively as the waves crest and crash, and
keep deluding us that rent and land values are trivial.

It seems odd that US Department of Commerce scriveners recognize invisible
“imputed rent” in owner-occupied housing, but not cash rent lumped in profits and
interest. What are they thinking? Thinking or not, they whittle rent down to a minute
part of national income - a part so small there seems no point in even listing it
separately, unless the point is to persuade us that rent today has become trivial.

NIPA is worse than the IRS, in a big way, because NIPA explicitly excludes “capital
gains” from National Income. “Capital gains” is an artificial term that includes all gains
realized from the sale of what Congress defines at any time as “capital assets.” “Capital
assets” include land and improvements, housing, common stock, timber, breeding
herds (including race and show and riding horses), subsoil mineral and fuel deposits,
and several other favorite holdings of the rich and well-connected. As we saw in “2.1.2”,
most commercial rents show up as capital gains, so that NIPA does not report them
at all.

Standard economists go with the flow and pass the results along as though they
must be true, because they are official. Then we find in a standard textbook by
Paul Krugman and Robin Wells of Princeton University that rent was only 1 percent of
US income in 2004 (Krugman and Wells, 2006). One would expect Krugman, of all
people, to see through this error. He often writes with critical insight exposing official
book-cooking. He is pro-labor, so why would he endorse such a mythical figure with its
‘implication that labor must pay all the taxes — the Curse of Caesar added to the Curse
of Adam? It seems to be because an official source, the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
says so, and he has not been moved to examine definitions or methods. “Mainstream”
economists read mainly each other, while writing for the rest of the world. Like
semi-conductors, their data flow only one way.

2.1.4 Federal Reserve Board (FRB) estimates. Another source of data is the FRB.
Unfortunately its leaders live inside the same intellectual bubble as the other agencies
mentioned, so its nominal independence is wasted. Hudson and Feder have unpacked
FRB methods, which they found to report rents of income property so far below reality
that they actually became negative, exposing their error to what Hudson and Feder call
a “comical” degree: trillions of dollars of real estate value based on negative rents! Such
“comedy” has tragic effects on policy. Rather than reform the methods, the FRB
discontinued the series, producing less comedy but more tragedy (Hudson and Feder,
1997a, b).

2.1.5 The National Bureau of Economic Research. Economists reflexively look to the
National Bureau of Economic Research for numbers. Thus, Raymond Goldsmith’s
estimates of the USA land values have been widely cited as authoritative, old as they
now are, and ripened into a permanent mindset trivializing land values. Yet they do not
bear examination. Goldsmith generated them as incidents to other work in a negligent,
offhand way (Goldsmith, 1962, 1955).

It is hard to retrace Goldsmith’s steps; one must track interlocking footnotes from
several sources. At the end of the trail, however, he simply takes residential land value
as 15 percent of building value (which comes to 13 percent of land and building value).
The basis of this allocation is the share of land in the cost of one to four family houses
insured by the Federal Housing Authority in the 1950s (!), which was about 20 percent.
It is not explained why he cut this down to 13 percent.

This basis is then applied to nonresidential real estate as well. Corporate-held lands
are valued at book value, although hundreds of corporate raiders pierced this veil years
ago, ferreting out undervalued assets.

These methods are not worthy of the faith with which the results have been cited by
several economists. In the first place, FHA-insured houses are not typical. They tend to
be new and on cheap land. Those not new are not very old — in 1967 the median age of
insured existing homes was 13 years. To apply such data to a typical American city,
most of whose dwelling units antedated 1920, is not defensible.

The FHA is most active at the expanding fringe of cities. A basic fact of urban land
economics is that the land share rises toward the center. In Manhattan, for example, the
share of assessed land value has always been higher than in the outer Boroughs.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

333

IJSE
36,4

334

FHA clientele is lower middle class, which means the land share is low. Land is both
a consumer luxury and a rich man’s hedge, so the land fraction of the value rises
sharply with value, clear up to William Randolph Hearst’s castle at San Simeon, sited
on a parcel of 62,000 acres of the-primest of prime land. As to the castle building, it
proved to be such a white elephant that the heirs deeded it over to the State of
California to maintain. The high land share in Beverly Hills, Rancho Santa Fe,
Palm Beach, Belvedere, Greenwich, Kenilworth, Aspen, or other enclave of great or
considerable wealth is also of course, missing from FHA data.

Goldsmith also seems to omit vacant lots and unsubdivided acreage. He also omits
the value of subsoil minerals: imagine the effect of that in, say, Huntington Beach or
Long Beach, CA, or any of various oil towns in Texas or Oklahoma.

Applying a land share derived from residential data to commerce and industry is all
wrong, anyway. The land share is highest in retailing, the more so now that retailing
entails vast parking areas. Some other low-density non-residential land-uses are filling
stations, auto dealerships, lumber yards, junk yards, open storage of all sorts, tank
farms, parking lots, railroad yards, utility easements, industrial reserves, dumps,
drive-ins, salt beds, terminals, and so on. In downtown Milwaukee, half the assessed
value, and more of the true value, is land, even though Milwaukee is an industrial city,
highly decentralized. In Manhattan, it is instructive to consider the Empire State
Building. If ever a structure overdeveloped a site, the nation’s tallest building on a
mediocre site (far from the 100 percent location) should be it(5). Yet in two transactions
since 1950 the site was valued at one-third the total, What this implies of the whole
island one may infer: it has many more low-rise than high-rise buildings, many more
old than new.

Several case studies may be cited. The Whitstable Report by valuer Wilks is a study
of land value rating (that is, taxation) in an English city, commissioned by the English
Rating and Valuation Association. He began by valuing residential land:

It was soon noticed that the figures of rateable value we were producing were very much
lower than those in the current orthodox valuation list. Indeed, at one time it was feared that
the total rateable value would be so low that to produce the same rate income as at present, a
rate poundage of well over 20 shillings would be necessary [...] [But] our fears were
groundless, for the loss in rateable value in the outer-lying residential areas was more than
made good by the increase in the other areas (Wilks, 1964).

The report gives detail on how central, vacant and derelict land made good the losses.

Paul Wendt has documented the higher land share in the central business districts
of San Francisco and Oakland (W endt, 1961), and Bronson Cowan has done the same
for Sydney, Johannesburg, Wellington, and other cities that tax only land value
(Cowan, 1958). A much higher share of local taxes comes from the center when only
land is taxed. The same relationship holds in Fresno, as reported by
Griffenhagen-Kroeger, Inc., to the California legislature (Griffenhagen-Kroeger, Inc.,
1962). Schwartz and Wert found the same in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania (Schwartz and
Wert, 1958).

Another study is my Milwaukee cadastral mapping from 1963 to 1965/6]. My
co-workers and I estimated market land values by tax book districts. We divided these
by the equalized full value assessment of land and buildings. The resulting fraction is
an estimate of the share of land in the value of real estate (Gaffney, 1970a, Table 9.3).
The districts with low land shares comprise at least three kinds. One kind is far out,
on the less prestigious south side, newly built, and fairly filled in. A second kind is in
and alongside the black ghetto on the near north side, where buildings are old but
dense. A third kind is among industrial plants.

Districts with high land shares are different. Those with ratios above unity reflect
acutely lagging assessment: some of these are largely vacant, highly speculative, on
the extreme south and northwest. Some are downtown and its leapfrogging western
edge, moving into old residential areas. Others are on and around the secondary
downtown, Mitchell Street.

Extension of the map into the suburbs inside Milwaukee County shows similar
patterns. The land share is low in tight, fully built middle-class suburbs: Shorewood
and Whitefish Bay. It is low in industrial suburbs with blue-collar housing: Cudahy,
South Milwaukee, West Allis. The land share is high in sprawled suburbs with empty
land: River Hills, Oak Creek, Greendale, Greenfield, and Franklin. It is moderate in
mixed suburbs subject to offsetting influences: Glendale, Wauwatosa, Brown Deer.

On the whole, these findings bear out Wilks’s findings in Whitstable, although the
Milwaukee patterns are more complex, Milwaukee being much larger and less
centralized. But one thing is crystal clear. Goldsmith’s transfer of the land share ina
few new FHA residences to all urban real estate, of all uses in all quarters, is a
momentous error. It dominates his estimates and destroys any value they might have.

2.1.6 The Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. Most data and interpretations published
by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, its staff and grantees, downplay the value of
land, as well as the possibilities of using it as a major source of revenue. They follow
the pattern set by the parent Lincoln Foundation in 1961 when it backed and may have
micromanaged studies by Keiper ef al. (1961). ‘

Professor Mills, an influential Professor of Real Estate at Northwestern, has testified
to the influence of Kurnow’s work by citing it as “the best source” on the aggregate
value of land (Mills, 1998).

Kurnow’s basic source is tax assessments. He accepts their allocation of value
between land and buildings. Errors are possible, but “in all likelihood there is a
tendency for such errors to cancel each other” (Kurnow, 1960). Believing so, he does not
even correct for the assessment bias shown by sales-assessment ratios of the Census of
Governments and other studies, and of course, does not correct for the greater degree of
underassessment that would be revealed by mapping land values, or by the rest of the
31 factors bulleted in Appendix 1. His estimate of land values is no better than its
sources, which we there showed to be heavily biased downward. Kurnow’s estimates
are therefore no more valid than Goldsmith’s.

Another error by Kurnow is to assume that the value of the buildings rises in
step with indices of construction costs (Kurnow, 1959, 1960, p. 344). But then-recent
research by Dacy and others had already revealed that these indices rise faster than
costs per unit of new output, due to technological advance (Dacy, 1962, see also
Gordon, 1968). As to existing stock, it suffers extreme obsolescence and is not worth
anything approaching its reproduction cost.

Kurnow was a known quantity when Lincoln and his senior adviser, Raymond
Moley, picked him. Kurnow had declared his views in 1959 and 1960 (Kurnow, 1959,
1960). The 1959 paper threw cold water on “the single-taxers”, just as Moley had in his
1939 book (p. 128), where he derides them as “goo-goos”. The 1961 work by

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

335

IJSE
36,4

336

Kurmow e¢ al. discloses an unusual relationship. The authors thank the Lincoln
Foundation for financing their work, which is usual. However, they then go on to thank
their financier David Lincoln and his senior advisor Raymond Moley personally for
“{ntellectual guidance”. That is not usual, it is extraordinary in independent scholarly
work. Then Kurnow et ai. add to the abnormality by declining to take responsibility for
the work that bears their names. They omit the universal disclaimer absolving their
advisors and patrons. This is unique. Res ipsa loquitur? Does this help explain why
researchers seeking full estimates of land values seek in vain at the Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy?

Kurnow and his co-authors have not been heard from since. David Lincoln has been:
“George said that (a Single Tax) would be sufficient to fund the government. Maybe in
his time, it would have, but it would be inadequate to do that now. If the government
collapses, we're all in deep s-.” (Lincoln, 1995).

2.1.7 Data limited to equity values. Some published surveys of real estate values pick
up sales prices where only the equity trades. Equities are net of debts, of course, which
most sources adjust for. They are also net of lease obligations, which may not be
adjusted for. In Orange County, CA, for example, much housing is built on leased land,
with 25-year terms. This writer has tried in vain to get DataQuick, a standard source
that feeds real estate market values to the press, to explain how they handle this issue.
Likewise, John Husing and Alonzo Pedrin have not responded (Husing and Pedrin,
2002). When chain retail corporations change owners, some of their real estate is on
leased land, and/or heavily mortgaged, so the trade value does not reflect all the
underlying land value.

2.1.8 Ignoring consumer budget data. Consumer budget and cost-of-living studies
regularly show that shelter costs loom high among consumer outlays: 25, 30, 35 percent,
never below 20 percent, depending on the investigator’ methods and universe. You
would think some conscientious number-cruncher would ask how shelter outlays can
be, say, 30 percent of consumer outlays, and rents be just 1 percent of national income.
One or both of those numbers is wildly off the mark. How odd that no quant or
macro-economist has ever raised such an obvious question. They pack 100 learned
journals with trivia and esoterica, where “a hair perhaps divides the false and true”, but
if this oversight were a dog it would bite them.

2.1.9 Using median housing prices like means. Most published data on housing
prices report median rather than mean values. It is not clear why: it is a custom.
The result is to understate per-unit housing values relative to, say, income per family,
and thus to understate the taxable capacity of housing relative to personal income.
That is because the mean outvalues the median. That in turn is because distribution of
values is highly skewed.

Here, is an example from Indian Wells, California, zip code 92210, sales recorded
from August 16 to September 15, 2007 (The Press-Enterprise, 2007):

* Median price — $726k.

* Mean price — $1,639k.

* Mean/median — 2.26.

* Mean price above median - $2,646k.
* Mean price below median — $600k.
It is bad enough to conceal inequality of housing values in average values. How much
worse it is to conceal it more by using median values. I give the example of Indian
Wells to illustrate a point. Its distribution is more skewed than most middling cities.
It is, however, typical of high-valued cities, like Malibu or Pacific Palisades, where one
finds a few mansions selling for over $50 million, and even the odd spread over
$100 million.

Most of the few modern economists who look into these matters at all rely on the
several standard sources cited above, mindless of or indifferent to their downward
biases.

2.2 Element No. 2 Recent rises of land rents and resource values
Prices of land and resources have risen sharply in recent years. For example, 50 years
ago leading economists like Kahn and Davidson and Douglas found that most oil
profits were rents, at the lower prices prevailing then. Oil firms were a byword for tax
avoidance. Since then prices have risen sharply in several giant steps following the
first OPEC price revolution, while tax reform has been cosmetic at best, and Congress
has lowered income tax rates on capital gains (a big fraction of oil profits) to a cap of
15 percent. Natural gas prices, stable for a while, doubled in the last few years. The
price of copper on the London Metals Exchange in 2007 had risen to sixfold its value in
2001. The price of crude oil tripled, 2001-2007. A price that merely doubles
downstream, i.e. in London, more than doubles upstream at the source [7]. Few of
today’s leading economists and pundits are addressing these facts. They have been
differently screened and conditioned than the giants of “The Greatest Generation”, like
Kahn, Davidson, and Douglas. They are leaving an intellectual vacuum{[8].

The Great Land Boom, 2001-2007, is now the stuff of folklore. It was preceded by
another, 1985-1990, so that many (like this writer) who bought in 1972 or so have seen
their land values rise tenfold in 35 years, without their lifting a finger.

2.3 Element No. 3 Lowballing the land fraction of real estate

The land fraction of real estate value is much higher than standard modern sources
show. These sources today use a wrong method of separating land from building
values.

One indication is that on most assessment rolls the value of old “junker” buildings,
on the eve of demolition, is listed as higher than the land under them. This, too, is a
“tragicomical” result, a reductio ad extremum of a systematic, immanent error.
Obviously the old junker has no residual value: that is why the owner is junking it. It
has lost value to “locational obsolescence”. Real estate people recognize this concept
instantly. Not everyone does, however, which helps conceal it, and provokes mawkish,
nostalgic resistance to change, a favorite theme of TV serials.

People who make a virtue of recycling old cans and papers can be oblivious to the
much higher social value of recycling old urban sites. Many of these old “junkers” even
appear sound and valuable, as in enclaves of high values like
Kenilworth/Winnetka/Glencoe, I!linois (moderately high), or Beverly Hills, California
(immoderately high), but suffer from “locational obsolescence,” which is the key
concept. That means the growing value of the underlying site for recycling has
cannibalized the residual building value.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

337

IJSE
36,4

338

24 Element No. 4 Farmland

Farmland warrants separate treatment because generations of usage and poetry have
conditioned us to equate “land” with rural life, rolling prairies, swales and rises, sowing
and reaping, ploughing and grazing, food and fiber. Political campaigns have
persuaded many that a “tax on land” means a special tax on farm folks, and “farm folks
are good folks”. “Back to the land” has meant leaving cities behind.

Professor Schultz of Chicago has put an academic gloss on the idea that “land”
means mostly farmland; and that farmland is decreasingly “important” in farming
itself. For such contributions to knowledge he was awarded a Nobel Laureate. His
views imply, clearly, that land cannot be a rich tax base. Neither of his two points is
true, however. For some reasons why not, see Gaffney (1985, 1992b).

In terms of market values, farmland ranks below some other kinds of lands and
resources. One city parcel in Los Angeles sold recently for $62 million per acre ($1,423
per square foot). That is tops for Los Angeles, but Los Angeles values fall below denser
cities, like San Francisco and Miami Beach, where land values rise over $3,000 per
square foot. Manhattan now tops out at over $10,000. In Tokyo at the height of its
boom in 1990, the grounds of the Imperial Palace alone were said to outvalue the whole
state of California: cities, farms, subsoils, beachfronts, the lot. A square foot on the
Ginza was supposedly valued over $20,000. There are 43,560 square feet per acre, to
that comes to $870 million per acre. One acre at the Ginza price is worth 870 farms
worth $1 million each.

Nevertheless, farm values are high relative to farmers. The number of serious farms
in the US has dropped from six million in 1930 to below one million today, while the
area of land in farms is still about 900 million acres, or 900-acres per farm[9}.

Values per acre vary widely, of course, and are subject to many influences. In the
Midwest, more than elsewhere, a farm is just a farm, but it yields more than food and
fiber. Now it is “food, fiber, and fuel”. The ethanol boom has pushed land prices up by
factors like 20 percent, 2005-2007, so $5,000 an acre is not unusual, and a peak of
$10,000 an acre has been reported. At a lowball $2,000 per acre, 900 acres is worth
$1.8 million. That is a substantial tax base per average farm.

High land rents and values usually mean that absentees own a high fraction of the
land. Lacking a high local property tax rate much of that tax base is skimmed off to
support retirement havens elsewhere, from Palm Beach down to The Ozarks, leaving a
superficial impression of fiscal poverty amid the economic plenty of rich farmlands.
Self-evidently, that impression is false when you count in the absentee owners
(Gaffney, 1976a).

Owing to the vast areas involved, to own farmland is to own a lottery ticket in the
sweepstakes of future subsoil finds. One of these, of growing value, is the aquifer.
Aquifers are invisible, but store more water than all our surface reservoirs.

An early winner was oil prospector Newton Bass (no relation to the Ft. Worth
family). In 1943 he bought high desert land north of Cajon Pass for $2.75 per acre, to
look for oil. He found a rechargeable aquifer instead, under the Mojave River, and his
desert land became what is now the City of Apple Valley, California. With water, and
the spread of Los Angeles, and Roy Rogers’ “Happy Trails”, his land rose by 1950 to
4,000 times what he had paid, and many times more since then[10].

The Kern Water Bank along I-5 west of Bakersfield is a now-private aquifer holding
730,000 acre-feet of publicly-supplied water in a bone-dry area. Stewart Resnick of
Los Angeles, Paramount Farming, and a select few others control it by controlling the
overlying farmland. They also control the Dudley Ridge Water District, a “public”
agency in which only landowners vote. After the water is gone, the reservoir will abide
to be recharged again and again (Arax, 2003).

Another rechargeable aquifer underlies the Coachella Valley (Palm Springs and
vicinity). Every overlying landowner may pump water at will, while State and Federal
water lines recharge the storage continually for their benefit. Such pumping rights,
originally agricultural, now water about 100 golf courses that have sprung up there,
interspersed with time-share condos catering to those who can afford them in addition
to their primary and other residences. Many of these courses (the ones for members
only) are exempt from all but trivial property taxes (details on golf course assessments
in Appendix 1).

In south central Colorado, the deep “Closed Basin” (in San Luis Valley west of the
Sangre de Cristo Range, north of White Sands National Park) holds 2 billion [sic]
acre-feet of groundwater, trapped behind a great underground natural dam. 2 billion
acre-feet is 50 times [sic] the combined capacity of Lakes Mead and Powell on the
Colorado. Each drop is precious in the arid region. Billionaire Canadian oilman Maurice
Strong in the late 1980s headed a consortium that bought the 100,000 acre Baca Ranch
overlying this aquifer, planning to pump and sell the water to Denver for a large gain.
Moving water is more politically complicated than outsider Strong may have reckoned,
so he sold to native son Gary Boyce, who continues political maneuvering to sell. In all
this, the vast Baca Ranch farmland is just a stalking horse for the aquifer Quillen,
2002).

The Ogallala Aquifer underlies the high plains from Texas through Nebraska. Man
has overdrafted it and cannot recharge it. Nothing daunted, oilman Boone Pickens has
picked up 200,000 acres in and around Roberts County, Texas, near Amarillo, to
establish a claim on the Ogallala, with an aim to export the water to Dallas. He has set
up a dummy Water District under Texas law that gives him a power of eminent
domain for a pipeline he proposes, and tax exemption for bonds to finance it (Woellert,
2007). Eminent domain is, of course, a species of land right that should be taxable.

Some other recent aquifer speculators have been PG&E Properties in northern
California, Peter Hensen and John Huston near Denver, Bell Canada Enterprises (BCE),
Keith Brackpool and his Cadiz Inc. with a 35,000 acre ranch cum aquifer in eastern San
Bernardino County, Richard Heckmann with Dan Quayle and his US Filter Corporation
in Riverside County and many other locations, Tenneco in Kern County, Azurix (front
for Enron) with 13,000 acres in Madera County over a deep aquifer that would receive,
store, and release 400,000 acre feet. It is not just the water, but also renting out space in
the aquifers. There are hundreds of others, including a few major oil firms, who have
received less publicity.

Surface water “rights”, too, may (with difficulty) be severed from the land and sold
for high prices to thirsty cities nearby. In one such case Sid and Lee Bass, oilmen who
also own the better part of downtown Fort Worth, bought Western Farms, with 40,000
acres in the Imperial Irrigation District. They then tried to sell its water allotment to
San Diego for some $400 per acre-foot{11]. The water in question is taken free from the
Colorado River by the Imperial Irrigation District and delivered at $12.50 per acre-foot
to its members.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

339

IJSE
36,4

340

Water transfers are legally complex, and become highly political at several steps.
The Imperial Irrigation Disrict, like all legal districts, holds water in trust for all its
landowner-members. The Bass’s, in their maneuverings, nearly got their business
associate Al Checchi elected Governor and, when that failed, financed and worked
through Governor Gray Davis. Where natural resources are on the auction block, and
taxes are zero, big money rushes in, and takes its political concerns right to the top,
diverting Governors and Legislators from other business that might benefit more
citizens. After a series of complex feints and parries, the Imperial Irrigation District
itself bought Western Farms to quiet the matter, profit the Bass’s, and profit the
District by selling the water directly to San Diego.

However, much or little the original and intermediate landowners finally got, it is
the water, an incident of landownership in the Imperial Irrigation District with its prior
claim on the Colorado River, and its subsidies from the US Bureau of Reclamation, that
is the source of the land value.

Other more obvious subsoil values are fuels: oil, gas, coal, and uranium. The whiff
of such values brings the “lease-hounds” running, spreading new riches of bonus bids
among wizened farmers, scattering a new level of “floating values” among many voters
over wide areas. (For more on subsoil minerals, Section 3.3.4, “Exhaustible Resources”,
below.) There are also valuable deposits of the original 92 elements in Mendelejev's
Periodic Table. In some areas, like Michigan’s Upper Peninsula, mineral firms
dominate “farm” values and, according to some critics, have aborted normal settlement
for 150 years (Smith, 1960).

In smaller eastern states like Maryland, Delaware, Rhode Island, and
New Hampshire, most of the farmland is so-so in fertility but high in urban
influence. An acre of farmland there sells for twice the price of more fertile Midwestern
and prairie soils. It is partly the prospect of a quantum leap into housing that upvalues
the land, but also the advantages of urban access to farming and farm life per se, as the
Supervisors of Montgomery County Maryland learned in their experiment with
transferable development rights (TDRs). Outlying farmland owners sold out their
TDRs cheaper than the planners had expected, because of the high value of their land
for farming and/or manorial living, without development (Daniels, 1998).

3. Group B. Broadening the concepts of land and its rent

3.1 Element No. 5 Rents best tapped by variable charges

Many lands and resources that yield rents are not observed or measured in traditional
real estate markets. There is a new realization, flooding in unseen like a riptide below
the spume, that “taxes on rent” are broader than the traditional property tax on real
estate ex buildings.

3.1.1 Fixed vs variable tax bases. As esteemed a Georgist as Vickrey often
pronounced the prime virtue of land taxes to be that they are a “lump sum”, meaning
not a function of production or sales. He thus identified them solely as property taxes,
and not any variable charge like a severance tax on withdrawing water or oil, or a
parking fee, or a gas tax, or a bridge toll (even though he favored these, for what he saw
as other reasons). He did not see the corporate income tax as being in large part a rent
tax, which it is, and he opposed it.

It is a cliché of economics texts to class land-based property taxes together with poll
taxes as having the peculiar, and apparently sole, virtue of not varying as a function of
any variable input or output. They call them “lump sum” taxes for that reason, and
often let it go at that — except it is more common to cite poll taxes than land taxes. In
this mindset, there are no differences worth mentioning between poll taxes and land
taxes — an extreme instance of tunnel-vision and involuted mindset that reveals how
far modern economics has drifted from common sense. The mindset comes from
focusing narrowly on marginal incentives, ignoring distribution, justice, income and
wealth effects.

The term “single tax” has been unfortunate in helping perpetuate the narrow
fixation on property taxes, and resulting underestimate of revenue potential from rents.

3.1.2 User charges for crowded streets and roads. Many of the siblings in what
Netzer (1973) calls “a family of user charges” (which he would substitute for building
taxes) are not substitutes for land taxes, they ave land taxes. They are means of
collecting rent for the use of city streets (Gaffney, 1970a). Most Georgist expositors
have long cited parking meters to illustrate Georgist principles. So strong is the
“single-tax” stereotype, though, that not even Netzer (1998), who has long been tuned
into rent issues, includes user charges as part of land revenues. He writes of them
purely as efficiency devices. When he writes about the taxable capacity of land they are
missing.

Shoup is publishing currently on the multiple benefits of metering curb parking at
higher rates (Shoup, 2005). Shoup sees meter revenues as rent charges. He estimates
their revenue potential as astonishingly high, equal to all existing property tax
revenues from all kinds of private property. This is only from parked cars on public
land. Singapore, London, and other cities have shown there is high revenue from taxing
moving vehicles, too. New York City, as is well known, gives away its taxi medallions
for a song, while their market value soared to ‘over $300,000 by 2004 and could,
obviously, yield large city revenues.

A major source of public revenue from crowding the streets is the excise tax (federal
and state) on vehicle fuels, mostly gasoline. It is a crude instrument, but the most
comprehensive we have now, and for some years to come. However, the effective tax
rate has fallen for 90 years, and is structured to fall further as fuel prices rise. That is
because the tax base is “specific”, i.e. a gallon of gas, regardless of price. The rate per
gallon has risen, but does not automatically keep up with prices. Call it “negative
bracket creep”.

3.1.3 Some other variable charges. Then there are mineral revenues from severance
taxes and/or royalties, plus income taxes. The narrowing “single tax” tradition is so
strong that Netzer, when writing about the revenue potential of land, omits them. The
omission is major. Severance tax revenues are already so high that some polities get
much, or even most of their revenues therefrom.

Leaders of the modern green movement like Robert Repetto, Robert Costanza,
Herman Daly, Alan Durning, Josh Farley and others, have identified many more
appropriate variable charges, with their generic motto “Tax bads, not goods”. What
about billboards, for example? These are merely legalized graffiti with social standing
and a lobby. Anyone who doubts the reality of visual pollution might shed the doubts
by driving through Vermont, which outlaws billboards. Unblemished nature looks
better: deep green for summer, red, orange and yellow for October “leaf-peepers”,
lavenders for November, steep whites for skiers, reviving greens in spring, it’s a
downer to leave that enchantment for the ad-ridden outside world[12]. The loss of rent

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

341

tax clear through until the Reagan years. Legally, it was pitched as an excise tax on the
privilege of doing business as a corporation. “The excise tax used net income as a
measure of the privilege of corporate business practice” (Herber, 1995). The legalistic
circumlocution suggests how creative lawyers can implement what Congress really
wants[15]. Indeed, the Nolan-Jackson Bill of 1920, and the Keller Bill of 1924, used
exactly such language as the constitutional basis for imposing a national 1 percent
charge on holding title to land. (Neither Bill passed.)

In addition 50 state legislatures, like Congress, control what kinds of income to
include in or exclude from the income tax base. They have abandoned most of their
discretion by piggybacking on Federal laws, but they could take their power back.
States have reacted to and counterbalanced Federal overreach before.

3.2.2 Untaxing income from labor. Congress can convert the income tax today into a
tax on land income in two steps.

First, exempt wage and salary income from the tax, in whole or in part. We could
also tiptoe out of taxing labor the same way our forebears crept into it, on little cat feet,
step by step. We could raise the earned income exemption, the standard deduction,
personal exemptions, etc. Workers paying the social security tax could deduct it from
taxable income, as they should have been doing all along. Meantime, raise the rates on
what remains of the income tax base, which would now be mostly property income.

The proposed step 1 may strike some as too radical, until they recall that from 1913
to 1941 (before withholding, and the explosion of the FICA tax rate) most wage and
salary income was in fact exempt. The whole of US participation in World War I was
financed without taxing payrolls, and with remarkably little borrowing, compared
with other nations, to whom we actually extended loans, as well. What is really radical
is the massive shift of tax burden off property income onto wage and salary income, a
shift that has upended the whole notion of progressive income taxation as originally
adopted in 1907 (the corporate income tax), 1913 (the 16th Amendment) and 1916
(the first substantial income-tax act of Congress) [16,17].

3.2.3 Untaxing income from capital. Step 2 is to remove capital income from the
base. This is harder to understand, but easier to accomplish because it has already
been done in part. The policy took off originally under JFK in the “Soaring Sixties”.
Heller, JFK’s Chair of the CEA, and the only Chair ever to exert much influence, was the
leading spirit. It was an idea from the Institutionalist-Georgist Commons, a leading
figure in the Economics Department at the University of Wisconsin where Heller
learned his economic ABCs (Commons, 1961).

The present tax law still includes several devices designed to lower or effectively
eliminate any tax on the income from capital. Basically, this is done by letting investors
write off what they invest in new capital at or near the time they invest it. The
investment tax credit (ITC) even goes farther and lets them write off more than they
invest, provided (and this is of the essence) they actually pay people to produce new
capital, as opposed to buying old capital and land. Heller pushed the ITC because he
foresaw how fast write-off could be perverted, as it has been, into multiple write-off{18]
and land write-off.

“Expensing” of certain capital investments means writing them off 100 percent in
the year made. This privilege is so valuable it reduces the effective tax rate to zero (0),
because after expensing the Treasury only receives a return on its own share of the
investment. Accelerated depreciation is a substantial move in the same direction.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

343

YJSE
36,4

344

Even straight-line depreciation is really accelerated compared to the true depreciation
paths of durable capital, especially when coupled with the use of tax lives which are
much shorter than economic lives of durable capital items.

None of those devices should apply to land, however, because land is not
depreciable, by Federal Law. That is again thanks to generations of Georgists, starting
with those in the Progressive movement when the income tax was shaped. Who else
would insist that land is different? Standard-brand academic texts keep teaching that
land is just another form of capital. Hall and Rabushka’s The flat tax, the “bible” of
the flat tax movement, provides that land purchases be expensable. So do variations on
the theme by Aaron and Galper (1985) and others.

To convert the tax fully to land, then, we need only complete step two by allowing
universal expensing of all new investments. Voila/ Be certain, though, not to let buyers
expense land as Robert Hall and Alvin Rabushka would.

3.2.4 Plugging loopholes for land income. At the same time, we must plug many
loopholes designed especially for land income. One of these is tax-depreciating land,
even though land does not wear out. This is illegal, but the IRS often allows it when
new buyers in series depreciate old buildings from their successive purchase prices.
Some economists and pundits have suggested in the past that the fisc should
compensate landowners before raising their taxes. James and Mill, Walras, Gossen,
Wallace, Spencer, Cannan, and others seriously discussed this, pro and con, in the
nineteenth Century. The tumult and the shouting died, but now, by letting owners
write off land, that is exactly what the fisc is doing, while economists are silent: the
leak is unseen, unsung, and unplugged.

It is more than a “leak”; it is the washout of a North Sea dike! To write off land just
once is to achieve effective tax exemption in perpetuity. Thereafter the fisc receives
only a return on its own investment. But the IRS continues to allow it, not just once but
time after time, world without end. It is a periodic negative tax (a subsidy) for holding
title to land. Little wonder so many analysts can waive aside the taxable capacity of
land as though it were nugatory. The power to tax is there, the tax base is there, but the
revenues are lost in obscure operations of a tax system that few people understand,
except the gainers, and they are not talking. I have published elsewhere a long list of
other loopholes for land (Gaffney, 1969, 1970b; Noyes, n.d).

Many will object, and with reason, that the income tax only recognizes realized
income from land. It exempts the many holders who neglect or underutilize land.
(We discuss below those who take only imputed income from land.) True enough, and
important, this is why we need the property tax. However, consider two points. First,
we are surveying how to improve the income tax we already have, assuming voters
want to keep it. Second, observe the behavior of private landlords and tenants. They
often prefer arrangements that share risks and returns, like the income tax, instead of
fixed cash rents that resemble the property tax. There are those who favor these
anyway, because they consider participation and risk-sharing to be better ways to
assert what Walras called the “co-proprietorship of land by the state.” As Turgot
explains at length in his Réflexions, fixed rents work better with tenants who have
some capital on tap to cover the risk.

Another advantage of the income tax is to capture more of the unrealized
appreciation of minerals in situ. Ideally this would not be necessary. Ideally, a property
assessor could put a present value on the future cash flow from a mine-mouth or
wellhead or open pit, and assess that each year as it gradually ripens from green
resource to green cash, over many decades. In administrative practice and law, though,
that has proven difficult, and does not always happen. Some assessors do not value
unripe resources until they approach harvest time, and the valuable subsoil deposit is
about to fly. Given that problem, a severance or income tax at time of extraction is the
only way to tax the capital gain that accrues between acquisition at low cost and sale at
a high price.

Some criticize the property tax on unripe minerals anyway, alleging that it hastens
extraction uneconomically. Others criticize the harvest tax, claiming the opposite.
A good compromise is to do some of both. The property tax on unripe minerals drives
them into the hands of the income or severance tax collector, while fear of the latter
keeps them on the rolls of the former (Gaffney, 1967, 1977). We find the same strategy
in private leases. There is a “delay rental” payable, like a property tax, annually until
the lessee starts commercial extraction; then a “royalty”, resembling a severance or
income tax, on each unit when extracted.

Taiwan’s farmland model has set a good example of such taxes in tandem.
In Taiwan, when the Chinese Nationalists were in power, farmland holdings above a
minimum size were taxed ad valorem, yearly, but in addition price gains were taxed
upon sale for an unearned increment. The former tax successfully prompted owners to
sell excess land, while the latter tax raised more revenue (Riew, 1980; King, 1988).

A weakness of the income tax, under current definitions, is that non-cash income
(imputed income) is exempt. This includes all the imputed income of the land under
and around owner-occupied homes. Most economists, gua economists, tell us that this
isa monster loophole in the present income tax. To make it worse, interest secured by a
home is deductible, even though the corresponding imputed income is untaxed; so are
local property taxes, even though they finance untaxed services. It is no professional
secret tightly held: popular and business presses for years have harped on home loans
as “the last great tax shelter”.

A problem with these professional economists is that, having made the point, they
let their amateur politics override their professional economics. They tell us the voters
would not accept the tax policies implied by the economics, so forget the economics.
How good are economists as politicians? Not very: Canada already disallows deducting
interest on home loans, on the solid ground that the fisc does not tax corresponding
income (the imputed income of the home). This is what US pundits tell us that voters
“will never accept”. They call it “poison at the polls”, “the third rail”, and other such
conversation-stoppers. Are Canadians so much deeper than Americans? Each nation
labors under its own native follies, but Canadians demonstrate that voters are not
predestined to fall for this particular one.

Another problem with these professional economists is that they limit the scope of
imputed income to “housing”, narrowly defined. Think of all the demesne attached to mere
houses in expensive retreats of the wealthy. Think Berkshire County (Lenox,
Tanglewood), Massachusetts; Pitkin County (Aspen), Colorado; Bourbon County
(blue-grass, whitewashed fences, mint juleps), Kentucky; San Juan County (channel
islands, sun’s-over-the-yardarm), Washington; Loudon, Fauquier and Albemarle Counties
(hunt clubs and stirrup cups), Virginia; Spring Valley (horsey set near town), Maryland;
Vilas and Walworth Counties (lakes and beer), Wisconsin; Barrington (mink and manure),
lilinois; Flathead County (landed gentry cum logging), Montana; Glenwood Springs

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

345

IJSE
36,4

346

(broncos and access to public lands), Colorado; The Hamptons (beaches and rich
neighbors), New York; Saddle River (class), New Jersey; Pinehurst (golf), North Carolina;
Killington (skiing), Vermont; Holderness (brains and Golden Pond), New Hampshire; or
Santa Barbara County (climate and cinema stars), California. Think horse farms, rivieras,
waterfronts with beach and boating, golf, polo, hobby farms and ranches and groves and
vineyards, duck blinds and decoys, celebrity neighbors, country manors with sweeping
lawns over wide demesnes, ski resorts, game preserves, hunting of several kinds, summer
camps, forested retreats, dude ranches, cattle ranches as vast and scenic as National Parks,
the whole complex of landed diversions whereby some Americans emulate English
country squires and bid land up and away from real farmers producing food and fiber.
Yes, even think of endless west Texas, where oilman Boone Pickens is buying up vast
ranches, and retiring cattle for quail, his favorite prey, for the bird-shooting trade. (Pickens
may be combining this with his plan to tap the Ogallala Aquifer for exporting
water eastwards.)

A legislature could define imputed “land income” as a fixed proportion of land
value, regardless of cash flow, and tax it. Many economists would have to call that
reasonable, since they have already inserted imputed income of housing in the NIPA
measure of national income[19]. They understate it, as noted above, by limiting it to
“housing”, narrowly defined, but at least they endorse the idea. Remark well, that
would make the income tax into something much like the property tax.

3.2.5 Current unearned increments as current rents. Professors Robert Murray Haig
and Henry Simons gave their names to “Haig-Simons” income, a definition of taxable
income that includes unrealized unearned increments, taxable in the year that they
accrue, not waiting for sale. Many, probably most economists until the Gingrich Era
endorsed Haig-Simons, at least in principle. Harold Groves and Vickrey are two of the
better-known. In 1966, Canada’s Royal Carter Commission recommended Haig-Simons
at a high political level (Carter Report, 1966). Dr Pechman of the Brookings Institution
devoted much of his career to promoting his “Comprehensive Income Tax Base” based
on Haig-Simons. (Pechman, like Heller, studied under Professor Harold Groves at
Wisconsin.)

In 1973 economist Harry Kahn, inventorying untaxed kinds of income, estimated
that unrealized capital gains were ten times the value of realized gains; and that the
excess of unrealized over realized gains was about 20 times the value of imputed
housing rents (Kahn, 1973). His figures may have been casual, but clearly this is a huge
item. Since then, “capital” gains as a fraction of income have swollen.

Few seem aware that “capital” gains are mostly land gains, misnamed. Most true
capital depreciates and obsolesces, by nature; it is land that appreciates. That is why
the little island that Pieter Minuit bought from the Canarsee Indian tribe in 1626 for
$24, and the lands Thomas Jefferson bought from Napoleon for $15 million in 1803, are
now worth § trillions, while their buildings have gone, and come and gone and come
again, many times over. Mislabeling land gains as “capital” gains seems calculated to
keep people in the dark, and it has succeeded because so many people, including
economists who should know better, live in thrall to “The Tyranny of Words”.

Land gains are a form of taxable land rent, as we will demonstrate. But as gains
grow so do the wealth and political power of the political and allied academic
movements to untax them. So much greater, then, is the need for objective economists
to establish the taxability of capital gains, to show how to tax unrealized gains as they
accrue, without disincentive effects or administrative nightmares. We need to scope out
the huge revenue potential that now largely escapes taxation.

A property tax based on the market value of appreciating or “ripening” land is a tax
on the accrual of value, levied annually as the value accrues. How is that? In a
reasonably perfect market for futures, the annual increment is the current price times
the interest rate, say 5 percent. The property tax is the current price times the tax rate,
say 2 percent. Therefore, the tax is a fixed portion of the current annual increment.
Economists of high repute and mathematical ability have been astonishingly dense
about this. Vickrey, for example, who campaigned to have capital gains taxed as they
accrue (rather than on sale), declared there is no simple way, as he worked out schemes
to do it in complicated ways that only a theorist of his brilliance could love
(Vickrey, 1947), and not even a theorist of his stature could sell, not even to fellow
economists[20].

Owners of appreciating land have long seen the point, but from their own slant,
which is to avoid taxes, whatever havoc they wreak on the English language. They
have agitated to have the property tax base converted from market value to a multiple
of just the current cash flow. They call this “capitalized income”, and have sold their
terminology to the world. It is well below the discounted cash flow (DCF) of all future
rents (equations 1-3). DCF is common coin in private appraisal work, but not in public
assessments for taxation. When the public has to condemn land for public works, on
the other hand, that’s different! Then it’s back to DCF valuations to inflate the price.
The excess of DCF over capitalized current income then emerges in glaring contrast
(Appendix 1, bullet 3).

Some George champions point out there would be no unearned increments if the
property tax rate on land values were as high as they would have it (and buyers and
sellers expected it to remain high). Thus, they dismiss thoughts of how we get from
here to Nirvana, and how we make do en route. “Some for the Glories of This World,
and some sigh for the Prophet’s Paradise to come”. As to “This World”, perfectionists
also dismiss the income-tax version of the capital gains tax because it is an imperfect
tax (which it is). It is levied only at time of sale, making it (as Wicksell wrote) a tax on
commerce, a barrier to allocating land ideally. But its virtue depends on “compared to
what?”. It certainly beats the income tax sans a capital gains tax. ;

As to the last, the capital gains tax, being part of the income tax, actually serves a
useful political role en route to the Prophet’s Paradise. It makes the income tax less
attractive to recipients of land gains, discouraging them from pushing legislators to
replace the property tax with the income tax.

That is politics. The central economic truth here, however, is little appreciated, and
therefore wants underscoring. It is that the property tax based on land value,
remarkably, taxes both the current rent, and the current unearned increment as it
accrues. Both at once: both at the same rate! Thus, en route to the Prophet’s Paradise, it
offers something “Alike to those who for Today prepare, and those that after some
Tomorrow stare.”

Some say that is double taxation, or making something out of nothing. They
overlook that we are traveling through infinite time. Use up a century or two, infinite
time remains: the end recedes as fast as the future nears. There is always tomorrow,
and tomorrow, and tomorrow, undiminished by all the yesterdays. We die, our works
crumble, the very paint on the “immortal” Mona Lisa cracks, photo-chemical smog eats

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

347

IJSE
36,4

348

at the Parthenon, the facing sloughs off even the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, but space on
Earth survives, as fresh for new mornings as it was on the First.

Normally, future rents will be higher. That raises the DCF of the present by taking
from an infinite reservoir of time, gaining something while losing nothing. Like
infinity, it is counter-intuitive and hard to conceive. Our minds are geared to finite lives
in finite time. Yet markets have adapted to the infinite life of land since time
immemorial. Even those who preach that the end-time is near buy and sell land at the
market.

Here, is the mathematics[21]. Let V be market value; let it also be assessed value.
Let 7, the property-tax rate; a, the current annual rent; and g, an annual percentage rise
of “a”. Then:

V=a/Gtt-g) (i)

You may derive equation (1) using high school algebra for the sum of an infinite
geometric progression.

Rearranging terms, we single out the annual gain of V, which is Vg, and denote that
as V:

VGé+D=a+V' (2)
Solving again for V:
V=[a4+VY/G+0 (3)

Again, V’ is the current annual rise of V, the “unrealized capital gain” that is part of
Haig-Simons income — current income. The denominator, (i + 2), is the usual “cap rate”
used by land appraisers and assessors. It is the way of capitalizing a into the
corresponding V when V is land value subject to an annual tax. If that looks novel, it is
only through neglect. It is common coin in land appraisal. Its reciprocal, /@ + A), is
the Englishman’s “years’ purchase” of land. It has been with us a long time: it is the
Frenchman’s le denier of which Turgot made so much in his Réflexions, 1766.
Tt resembles the stockbrokers’ P/e ratio, but with a property tax added.

Equation (3) tells us that a free market treats V’, the annual rise of V, as current
income, as Professors Haig and Simons said it is. It capitalizes it into V by the same cap
rate that it applies to “a”.

Finally, a tax rate, ¢; applied to the base V, taxes “a” and V' at the same rate:

Tax =(V =t/(t+i)x(@+V’) (4)

Equation (4) shows that the tax rate is being applied equally to a and to V, year after
year. The true tax base, then, is higher than a; it is (@ + V’). The fisc’s share of this net
income is é/(@ + H[22].

If future rent is to be heavily taxed, there will be less current value and less
appreciation. One might think that increments would thus be destroyed, but economic
value does not disappear without a trace. It is conserved, like matter and energy.
The value is rather transferred to the public. The right to levy future taxes has a
present value, too. The public can and does take current cash out of unrealized
increments to this present value in the same way private owners do, by banking them.
Thus, debt expansion soundly grounded on a rising tax base is current income that
the owner, private or public, may take as cash. It is part of what the public may spend
currently from the tax base, without reducing the net worth of the public equity, or
damaging public credit. Lest this seem reckless, recall that public debts have been
rising for a long time, in step with rising taxes of other kinds, which are mortgaged to
public debt. The rationale, found in most economics textbooks, has been in terms of
rising gross national product, which shrinks debt relative to tax base.

One must be cautious: this is sailing close to the wind, and spendthrift rulers can get
in trouble, as they have throughout history. The federal government turned to folly
after Arthur Laffer sold the “dynamic budgeting” notion that lower tax rates cum
wider loopholes would mean higher revenues, and Robert Barro sold his version of
“Ricardian Equivalence”, that higher public debts stimulate offsetting higher private
saving, and neo-cons sold the notion that war is quick and easy and profitable. But the
idea forwarded here is to raise tax rates on a rising base, and close loopholes. It is not to
finance aggressive wars, although one must recognize it would make it easier to do so.

Capital gains as a revenue source can be quite unstable. California's 2003 fiscal bind
illustrated the danger. The real estate bust of 2007 will soon do the same. This is not a
drawback of the present proposal, however, for this differs from the current income tax
on capital gains in several ways:

* The proposal here is to tax gains as they accrue, not upon sale. Sales are more
unstable than prices: they soar on a rising market, and drop like lead on a falling
market, redoubling the drop of the tax base.

* The proposal here is limited to land gains. Current income taxes, on the other
hand, include gains from other sources like building up a new business. During
the dot.com boom that broke in 2003, it was this last element that was most
unstable.

* During a land boom and bust, land taxes, if assessments were kept current,
would be a strong stabilizing factor — a factor that has been missing. Many
assessors refuse to follow a rising market, with reasons like “These green new
buyers from out-of-town are paying more than the land is really worth”. Never
mind that the buyers are risking their own money in the game, while the
Assessor observes from the bleachers. Implicitly, “I, the Official in Charge, know
better than the market”. :

However, the Assessor by law is supposed to follow a bull market, not outguess it.
When the “exuberance” appears in his wisdom to he “irrational”, his job is still to go
along, not judge. When private fee-appraisers go along they confirm and reinforce a
boom, but when the tax Assessor goes along he douses a boom with cold water: higher
taxes (Gaffney, 1985). It was the lack of such an automatic remedy that let the farmland
boom of the 1970s soar so dangerously high above reality, then the urban bubble of the
late 1980s, and now of 2001-2007.

3.3 Element No. 7 Taxes for conservation

3.3.1 Taxable surplus in water resources. Here, is a high potential to turn “Negabucks
into Megabucks” for the treasury. For generations past, we have subsidized
landowners to withdraw and waste water, rather than-charge them for it. The result,
as economists would predict, is chronic “shortage”, an endless train of “crises”.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

349

IJSE
36,4

350

The benefits of the subsidy have gone roughly in proportion to the area of irrigable
land owned. As a result, water is maldistributed, misallocated, underpriced and
wasted.

Today, growing numbers support a groundwater extraction charge, as a
conservation and efficiency measure, and to obviate megabuck “rescue” projects. As
modern “green” thinking slowly (oh, so slowly!) bends our mindsets away from the
tradition of subsidizing waste and maldistribution, there is also great revenue potential
in water, a double boon (Gaffney, 1992). In an arid land water is life, and people will pay
what they must. Some, perhaps much of the land rent now imputing to fee simple lands
can be transferred to the holders of water, by raising its price at the source.

Why should we want to transfer rents to the holders of water? Because water at the
source belongs to “the people” of each state that follows the “appropriative doctrine” of
western water law, and of many eastern states, too. A license to withdraw the people’s
water is not real property. The evidence, if any were needed, is that it is not taxed as
property. So it is not sheltered by Proposition 13, in California, or comparable caps on
property tax rates in other states (the Alabama laws call them “lids”). It is not sheltered
by the usual Constitutional safeguards of private property, because it is not property —
a license is just a legal “privilege”, subject to forfeiture, conditions, reservations and
term limits. Oregon State Supreme Court Chief Justice McBride put it plainly in his
opinion on in Re Hood River, 1924: “It does not seem to me that water use in this
country ever rose above the dignity of a mere privilege over which the state had
complete control”[23].

The State can serve free market efficiency and conserve scarce water and raise
revenue in one stroke by putting a charge on water withdrawals. Such a charge would
also expedite the current movement to market water (Gaffney, 1993a, 1997),
reallocating it to higher uses.

An economic charge should of course, be geared to the economic value (locational,
mainly) of waters. I have mentioned groundwater. Surface water, if regulated, could
bear higher charges because it is already at the surface with no pumping. This charge
might be called a “tax,” or a rental for state property, as politics may require. The
charge should cover not just active withdrawals, but “dog-in-the-manger” licenses to
block withdrawals by others. Value-data to help set a proper charge would come from
the proposed free market in tradable water licenses.

The great revenue potential may be envisioned by the fact that the State of
California now stores and delivers water from the Feather River, north of Sacramento,
clear to the Mexican border, pumping it over the 2000’ Tehachapi Range on its journey
of nearly 1,000 miles, using (but not paying much for) something like 5 percent of all
the energy generated in the State. The true cost at the margin is over $2,000 per
acre-foot delivered (Gaffney, 1982b). Nature delivers some water that far south for
nothing. The in situ value, or rent, of these native waters is therefore in the ballpark of
$2,000 per acre foot. Even if few would buy at that price, it would obviate the public
costs of wheeling water that far south. They would become “avoided costs”, in the
language of utility regulation.

Water has many uses besides those in farms, industries, and homes. Each of those
other uses has its revenue potential. There are transportation, amenities, power
generation, sea plants for human use, finfish and shellfish and marine mammals,
recreation, wildlife habitat, underwater communications, naval operations, sovereignty
over overflights and radio transmissions, tidal power, adiabatic sites for power, gene
pools, salt-water marshes, and others. To the extent that water supply takes water
from these other uses, their loss is part of the economic cost. People dying of thirst will
pay anything for a drink, but few people are really that thirsty, so the cliché is that
“people will vote for water, but pay for power”.

Also on the cost side are other resources used to develop and store and “wheel”
waters. Damsites of the right qualities are scarce. Reservoir sites are vast and often
scenic. Whole towns have been flooded out. Rails and highways and utility lines must
be relocated. Parkland treasures like The Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne
(Hetch Hetchy) and Glen Canyon on the Colorado have been drowned; 93 miles of
Hells Canyon on the Snake would have been had they built the proposed High Dam.

The seabed under water contains minerals and fuel deposits. The shoreline has
beaches and salt marshes and harbors and ports, and marinas for parking boats, of
which there are one million registered in each of Florida, California, and Michigan. The
National Marine Motors Association estimates there are 18 million motorboats
nationwide; there are also millions of “raghaulers” and lesser boats. No one has tried to
sum up the revenue potential from all those values, but they are clearly immense, and
may even exceed what people will pay for water supply in the simple sense.

3.3.2 Pollution effluent charges: “Tax Bads, not Goods”. On carbon taxes,
Peter Barnes estimated the revenue potential at 3 percent of GDP, or $228 billion a year
in 2001 (Barnes, 2001). That is for the gasified garbage from carbon alone. Since then,
of course, the price of hydrocarbons has risen much faster than GDP, and confirmation
of anthropogenic global warming has risen too. Barnes also points out that public
revenues from other pollutants like sulfur and nitrogen would add greatly to the total.
Sulfur mining from pure underground domes, by the Frasch process, also generates
large rents at the source (Montgomery, 1940).

Redefining progress, a San Francisco- and now Oakland-based think tank, has
estimated the generation of “illth” (Le. pollution, or negative externalities) at half of
GDP. That gives a macro perspective on the undreamed-of revenue possibilities.
Costanza et al, painting in even broader strokes, estimated the value in 1997 of 17
ecosystem services at $33 trillion per year, exceeding the world’s GDP (Costanza et al,
1997). That was perhaps exaggerated for publicity, but with enough documentation to
reinforce the high estimates of revenue potentials.

Joint power authorities in the Ruhr Valley of Germany pioneered the use of “effluent
charges” that cleaned up one of Europe's dirtiest rivers. Kneese and Bower of
Resources for the Future, Inc., pioneered in bringing this news to Americans (Kneese
and Bower, 1968; p. 1974). There was a flurry of interest and support in the Johnson
Administration. Since then it has been a hard slog through hostile Chicago economists,
discussed below. ;

Many in the Green Movement see the double boon in Pigovian taxes: they curtail
overuse and pollution of common airs and waters, while also raising revenue (Costanza
et al, 1997). Many academicians, sadly, bicker over whether this is possible, although it
seems like a no-brainer.

Taxing air and water polluters by levying “effluent charges” won the favor of many
economists influential in the 1960s. The reasoning, from Cambridge economist Pigou,
was pure Georgism: make polluters pay an economical price for fouling publicly owned
air and water. Kneese touted Germany’s Ruhr Valley as a model and success story.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

351

IJSE
36,4

352

Before the movement could make headway, Dales and Ronald Coase published their
rationalizations for an alternative system of giving tradable permits to polluters.
Chicago economists embraced and apotheosized Coase, who gave them the
rationalization they needed to hector environmentalists and give aid and comfort to
polluters. Professor Armen Alchian of UCLA, a Chicago economist in spirit, denounced
Pigovian taxes as interfering with free markets. Coase and the Chicagoans affected not
to care who gets the pollution rights. In Chicago-school economics, distribution of
wealth is an archaic nineteenth Century concern, obsoleted by Neo-Classical
Economics. All that matters now is optimal allocation. Trading permits, they allege,
will accomplish that.

But of course, the polluters do care. With their great wealth and political power, and
their support of and therefore by a dozen venal think-tanks, they have made it seem
only reasonable that permits to continue polluting should be given away to those with
track records. So the administration has created an aristocracy of ancient and
honorable polluters.

With the current obsession over global warming, many are now touting a “carbon
tax”. Barnes is an articulate champion (Barnes, 2001). His estimates of the revenue
potential are staggering (3 percent of GDP). The same forces that subverted Pigou’s
idea, however, are rallying against Barnes. Europe already has abandoned its
polluter-pays principles in favor of gifting the ancient polluters, “giving away the sky”,
as Barnes puts it.

3.3.3 Handling non-point pollution. “Non-point” pollution poses its own special
problems. Being impossible to measure and meter, it does not lend itself either to effluent
charges or tradable permits. Taxing pollution surrogates (like biocide purchases, for
example) is a rough alternative, but too rough. Such taxes are part of any program to
combat nonpoint pollution, and could raise substantial revenues. However, the policy
has narrow limits as an anti-pollution measure, and must be reinforced by other kinds of
measures to constrain the kinds of land use that encourage runoff.

For example, urban sprawl entails grading and denuding new lands. In the
Menominee River that bisects Milwaukee, 75 percent of the pollutant loadings come
from urban nonpoint sources, upstream and more sloping (even in “flat” Wisconsin).
Newly developing urban areas cover only 2.6 percent of the watershed, but contribute
37 percent of the suspended solids, and 48 percent of the phosphorus (Gaffney, 1988a,
1988/1989). “It’s the grading, stupid”. .

The most effective containment policy for urban sprawl is that contained in our
present subject, taxing land. Remove taxes from using the flatter lands of the original
city, while raising taxes on simply holding such lands. We need also sunset
cross-subsidies to scattered settlement (Gaffney, 1962b, 1964). Gaffney (1988a, b)
specified additional measures, mostly revenue-raising ones, in more detail.

With forest lands, as with urban, denuding land is the source of most runoff
problems. Erosion results from a combination of logging roads (too many, too long, on
land too steep); clearcutting; and slow replanting.

Slow replanting is the central problem. It slows the supply of second-growth timber,
and thus creates pressure to invade submarginal areas. Foresters should harvest the
low, flat, warm lands early and often because:

* replanting is economical there, it pays for itself where trees grow fast;
* seedlings grow fastest there, minimizing the exposure period of bare land;
* Jogging roads may be shorter and less erosive there, because nearer to markets
and on level land;

* the loss of scenic beauty is shorter;

* exposed bare land is flatter;

- logging is cheaper and less destructive; selective logging is more feasible;
* fire control is easier; and

* younger stands are more vigorous and naturally resistant to pests.

The last point shows how managing forests better can minimize pest damage without
relying so much on toxics. The spruce budworm, for example, damages mainly older
trees. To protect them owners spray whole forests, millions of acres in the northeast,
with tragic treadmill results.

The tussock-moth, over which forest managers have shed so much organochlorine
in the fir forests, damages trees mainly on poor growing sites. Trees on good sites
withstand defoliation, green up, and grow with renewed vigor. The moral: stay off the
poor sites. The method: utilize the good sites fully.

Why do not owners harvest the good sites early, replant them quickly, and utilize
them fully? This calls for thinking outside the box of the price mechanism, narrowly
conceived in the neo-classical way. One major reason lies in the tax system:

* Replanting cost is not expensable from taxable income, it must be capitalized,
hence not written off until decades later when timber is harvested. Oregon Senator
Robert Packwood who led the timber bloc while shepherding through our 1987 tax
reform Act (before succumbing to roving hand trouble), did not neglect timber
taxation, we may be sure. Neither did Idaho Senator Larry Craig who succeeded
Packwood (roving foot trouble). As Senators and tabloid scandals come and go,
however, timber lobbies hew relentlessly to the main chance. They have traded off
expensing to keep what they prize more, the capital gains treatment of timber
sales. They may soon secure both, for in the modern Washington consensus,
domestic and foreign and academic, only workers are to pay taxes.

* Most states have substituted the yield tax for the property tax. The result is a
bias against early harvesting (Gaffney, 1967a, 1980, 2006). When we look at the
whole system it also pushes cutting pressure out to marginal lands. But a yield
tax at a high rate destroys any incentive to restock marginal lands, once cut: it
makes them subeconomic to replant. Timber is called “renewable”, but on
marginal land it is more like mining. The prospect of a yield tax leaves the land
scalped for ages.

+ Some states have virtually eliminated the land value part of the property tax on
timber, removing an incentive to early replanting. A tax based on land value
continues at a steady level during the sterile downtime of land between harvest
and replanting, thus pricking holders in the most compelling way to restock,
while not taxing them at all for actually doing so. On marginal land the land tax
base is zero (it being based on a zero value) so it does not cause abandonment,
nor make replanting any less economic than nature already has.

+ When timber is growing the IRS does not recognize growth as ordinary taxable
income. Congress made timber a “capital asset” in 1944 (even while billing

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

353

IJSE
36,4

354

soldiers overseas, like this writer, for taxes on their meager pay). The IRS defers
any tax until harvest. That is close to tax exemption for some timber that may
take 80 years or more to mature. Then when and if timber is cut and taxed, the
maximum rate (as of 2007) is 15 percent, and headed south.

* When and after owners fell timber, however, value-added by labor in logging,
hauling, and in the mills and markets is “ordinary” income and bears the full fury
of the tax rates. So long as timber is standing there is no property tax, so it need
only grow fast enough to pay interest on its value. After it is cut for sawlogs, and
these are made into buildings, it must yield a rate of return high enough to cover
a property tax, too, not just on its stumpage value but also on the value-added by
felling, bucking, hauling, milling, shipping, storing, merchandising, and
constructing. This includes all the considerable taxes, like payroll taxes,
imposed on those activities.

All that adds up to a strong tax-induced bias against replacing old, disease-prone and
fire-prone trees by vigorous new ones.

Thus, the combined result defers harvest, increasing the volume of old,
disease-prone timber standing on good land, and pushing logging pressure out to
marginal lands. Many marginal lands, if stripped, cannot reclothe themselves in less
than a century or two. Logging there is simply mining, leaving soils as exposed as
Goya’s Maja Desnuda, and less pleasing to the eye.

Forestry on public lands, ironically, manifests parallel biases, from a different set of
incentives. Hyde, Clawson and others have documented the pattern: undermanagement
of superior sites accompanied by premature invasion of steep, remote sites as the
Forest Service internalizes all its profits from timber sales to build more roads (and its
empire) (Hyde, 1980; Clawson, 1976a, b).

An optimal solution would constructively combine and synthesize two apparently
contrary concepts of land stewardship:

* Concept A says “Conserve for the future.”

* Concept B says “Stewardship means highest and best use now.” Landholders are
responsible to use land in order to employ others (generate incomes), to produce
goods (combat inflation), and pay taxes (avoid deficits).

* Concept AB says do both, but in different places. Use the good lands intensively,
grow timber early and often, thus relieve human pressure and help conserve the
vulnerable, erosive lands. This was, by the way, the basic theme of the early
conservationists Gifford Pinchot, William Kent, Frederick Law Olmsted, and
their fellows, in the sunrise and high noon of the progressive-era conservation
movement.

Until we do this, will optimal taxes on aerial sprays do much good? Some good, yes.
But the main problems are outside the box of conventional price-theory thinking, and
call for another set of measures.

3.3.4 Exhaustible resources: buried bonanzas. Hardrock minerals are little tapped for
public revenues in the USA. Minnesota was once an exception, supporting its state
universities from hematite in The Mesabi range. Children of immigrant Finnish
laborers in Hibbing, Minnesota, received the best schooling in the USA from the local
cut of those taxes, but that was long ago, in the progressive era.
There are 92 elements in Mendelejev’s original table of 1869. The 17 listed since then
are not of comparable economic value, if any. Mankind constantly mines many of the
original 92, using them in products, then losing them to chaos. Nature conserves matter,
but not usability. Graedel ef af write that 26 percent of the recoverable copper in the
Earth’s crust, for example, has already been mined and scattered beyond economic
recovery (Graedel et al, 2006): classic entropy. Meantime, usage rates are rising.
This helps account for the 6-fold rise in copper price on the London Metals Exchange,
2001-2007. Platinum, used in catalytic converters, is even scarcer. “Yellowcake”
uranium ore has risen to great new heights. No one but a few owners gains from this;
everyone else loses.

Besides, the elements there are valuable natural forms and mixtures of them, like
diamonds and other gems, hydrocarbons for fuel, marble, slate, kaolin, asbestos,
structural stone, clay for bricks, sand, gravel, aggregate, cement, salt, and so on.
Mankind has prized salt throughout history, and even today uses masses of it in
industry, and in the north to melt ice on streets and roads. In some states and provinces
stone and gravel are the most valuable subsoil product. Their owners are a major part
of the “road gang” that lobbies for highway and other capital-heavy construction
projects.

Revenue from gravel deposits may take the indirect form of letting the owner
underbid rivals for lucrative highway contracts. The Yeager family of Riverside,
California, for example, built up its construction business by acquiring gravel deposits
near planned highways, which gave them an edge in bidding for lucrative state
contracts.

After the gravel is gone there may remain a hole that the owner uses as a dump,
charging by the load, and finally seals over to restore the surface and collect a third set
of rents. My own grandmother sold gravel by the truckload to the Vermont Highway
Department and the town of Dorset from a pit under her pasture and sugarbush on a
terminal moraine, and skipped step two. A daughter later sold the hole to the Central
Vermont Power System to hide a substation, as the pasture evolved into dwelling lots
that a workaday eyesore might blemish. In Brentwood Bay, north of Victoria, Jennie
(Mrs Robert P.) Butchart created an international tourist draw by turning the pit left
from Mr Butchart’s limestone quarry into her famous garden.

Meantime these valuable uses, especially the dumping, are unconventional, so many
county assessors (or town “listers”, in New England) overlook or undervalue them.
Pennywise counties or towns that underpay assessors, and understaff their offices, pay
the price when they get routinized personne! who do not know or much care how to
handle unusual cases.

Some national governments reap large revenues from subsoil deposits. Conrad and
Gillis in 1985 listed Chile, Thailand, Malaysia, Bolivia, Gabon, Jamaica, Liberia,
Papua-New Guinea, New Caledonia, Zambia, and Zaire as especially dependent.
Remember we are still treating just of hardrock minerals, not hydrocarbons, so Russia,
Norway, The Netherlands, Mexico, and other such nations, and states and provinces like
Alaska, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Alberta are not yet mentioned. Papua-New Guinea
retained Australian economic advisers Garnaut and Anthony, who have
published on their method of identifying and taxing net economic rent, free of excess
burden (Garnaut and Anthony, 1977).

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

355

IJSE
36,4

356

In the USA, however, the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) oversees 270 million
acres, and supervises leasing and mining on another 300 million, from which Congress
prevents it from taking any net revenues to speak of, under the Mineral Leasing Act of
1872. 1872! This Act sprang from what Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner
branded “The Gilded Age”, under the notorious giveaway Grant Administration. It still
hems us after 136 years. Governors and Congressmen from the Rocky Mountain States
monitor the BLM closely, and force out administrators like Clawson (1953) and Baca
(1994) who try to enforce even the weak laws we have. There are not even any local
property taxes, since the land is federal and the exploiters are lessees. About 20 percent
of the leased land is held by alien corporations.

One might think reform is hopeless, since the abuse has lasted so long. That
however is politics. Someday we may expect that wage-earners and consumers will
learn they are paying taxes to spare an aristocracy of land kleptocrats, and vote in
reformers. They will not learn, though, unless someone tells them, which is our present
objective. May other economists chime in!

The biggest money underground is from oil and gas. In 2006 the Chevron
Corporation had 62,000 employees and reported revenues of $205 billion. That is $3.3
million per employee. We may safely assume that the average wage or salary falls well
below $3.3 million a year, leaving a wide margin payable to the owners of property. A
passing knowledge of the industry tells us that a large share of that property is land in
several forms: petroleum in situ, refinery sites and use permits, tacit permission from
local governments to pollute surrounding neighborhoods, Supreme Court protection
against punitive damages for oil spills, sites for loading/unloading, pipeline rights of
way, tank farms, parking for tank trucks, retail station sites and aprons either owned
or dominated by the parent company, etc.

Not all the revenue imputable to petroleum is net income, of course, because of
depletion. The NIPA statement of national income does not deduct depletion, and it
should, and WE should for an honest accounting. The flip side of depletion, however, is
that undepleted deposits rise in value. Additional rent income is the annual increment
to values of shut-in reserves, as retail prices rise, and costs fall because technology
advances. By 1980, after the first two OPEC price hikes, security analysts and
accountants became concerned about the distorted picture of oil firms that developed
because they do not report inventory appreciation, as other firms do. (For tax
accounting, petroleum 7 situ is a “capital asset”, not an inventory.) There is no entry
on the balance sheet of oil firms for oil reserves. Capitalized investment is merely
symbolic, and independent reserve estimates are needed to find net worth (McDonald,
1963).

Accordingly, to better inform investors, the Financial Accounting Standards Board
(FASB), a private quality controller, and the SEC finally required Reserve Recognition
Accounting (RRA) for 1980 reports. Here, revenue was recognized at the time reserves
were determined, as opposed to when sold. So 1980 reports contain a wealth of
previously hidden data on the weight of this factor. The new rule ended after just one
year, under pressure from this puissant industry and a newly supportive
Administration, so this brief candle from 1980 is all the light we have.

Here, is Getty Oil Company as a sample, from their Annual Report to stockholders.
The increase in proved reserves in 1980 was $3.3 billion, or 3.18 times the net income
otherwise reported. In 1979, the increase was $6.3 billion, or 10.4 imes the net income
otherwise reported (Getty Oil Company, 1980). The value of proved reserves at
12/31/80 was $17.2B, or 2.07 times the Total Assets of all kinds reported conventionally
(Getty Oil Company, 1980, p. 37).

The reported reserves are net of royalties. Royalty owners bear no costs, so a
25 percent royalty could represent 50 percent or over 100 percent of net income. Thus,
for every dollar of added reserves reported by Getty, the lessee, there is a good fraction
of a dollar not reported, enjoyed by a royalty owner.

The increases were the joint results of findings, acquisitions, and price hikes; and
the greatest of these was price hikes, according to Getty. One could argue the details of
SEC reporting rules, particularly the myth of constant future prices. But Getty was
careful to note that these estimates “should not be construed as implying in any way a
price at which Getty would sell the assets.” Getty Oil Company, 1980, p. 62).
A billion here, a billion there, who knows how many? But clearly reserve increments
are big money, and a major part of the total income of oil firms. In one year the mere
increase in the value of Norway’s undersea reserves exceeded its entire national
income, otherwise reckoned (Aaheim and Nyborg, 1995).

Another authority that has challenged the traditional invisibility of reserve
appreciation is the California State Board of Equalization. Proposition 13 takes a
recognition-upon-sale posture towards land values, for purposes of property tax
assessment. But new construction enters the rolls at current market. The Board’s Rule
468 treats new findings as “new construction”, and also adds the increase of economic
reserves resulting from higher price (Love, 1980). I am currently researching what
information is available from this source.

There are several other reasons to think the rent share of oil and gas revenues is high.
One is the high and rising retail price of gasoline and natural gas and heating oil.
Many fields that were producing when gasoline retailed for 30¢ are still yielding nature’s
bounty with retail gasoline at 15 times 30¢. Another reason is the rise of royalty rates.
40 years ago the industry standard royalty was one-eighth or 12.5 percent. Now we find
rates up over 50 percent, and the lessees still prospering. A third reason is the high
value of company assets. Oil firms report a large fraction of the assets of Fortune
500 companies, with a much lower fraction of the employees, At one time a rare
labor-intensive giant like General Motors rivaled the oil giants in sales and profits, but
today GM faces bankruptcy while the oil giants continue to hold most of the top ten slots
in sales, profits, and assets — but not in employees. Their high sales are produced by
nature more than by man.

When an area becomes “oil-prone” the market land values rise simply because of the
odd chance that someone might strike oil there or, more commonly, take a leasehold on
the chance that he, the lessee, might find oil. Gene Wunderlich has written on how this
“floating value” floated over vast areas of North Dakota following the Williston Basin
strike (Wunderlich, 1967), tantalizing lease-hounds and sending many farm owners off
to retire in balmier climes.

The Williston boom rose and fell, but today there is a new and potentially huge
North Dakota oil boom based on The Bakken Formation. This is a 2-mile deep and thin
but vast, vast stratum now beginning to be accessed economically by horizontal
drilling techniques. Today’s high oil prices have made these techniques economically
feasible at last. The Bakken underlies much of western North Dakota, and also extends

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

357

IJSE
36,4

358

into neighboring states and provinces. Anyone selling land there would ask a premium
price.

All told, about 20 percent of the upland area of the USA is under lease for subsoil
resources, mostly oil and gas.

More than half our domestic oil and gas now comes from under salt water in that
vast empire that President Harry Truman added to the USA in 1945 when he annexed
all the seabed inside a 200-mile limit. The BLM manages it by leasing it to private
corporations.

Professor Walter Mead of U.C. Santa Barbara believes the BLM does a good job of
extracting most of the rent for the public purse. Some others, including this writer,
believe otherwise, but out of respect for Mead we will leave this moot here. Rather, let
us note how lessees play the system to lower their federal tax liabilities.

For decades from 1920 to 1975 oil firms earned ill fame for milking the “depletion
allowance” to avoid income taxes. There was no limit, in time or quantity or historical
cost, for deducting 27.5 percent of wellhead value from taxable income. It was the
quintessential loophole, deplored by everyone except the beneficiaries. In the 1970s
this loophole was partly closed, to great applause and relief. In the loss of public focus
that followed, lobbyists quickly replaced it with a new set of loopholes, less visible. The
writer has detailed them in a 1982 paper[24]. Here, I mention just one, the expensing of
leasehold abandonment.

In the nature of exploration, several leases are taken for each that proves
“commercial”, ie. worth using. It is a screening process. Something like fourth-fifths
are culled out and then abandoned. A reasonable person would construe the cost of the
four culls as part of the cost of acquiring the one producer, and this is the industry
position when explaining the high returns on the producing leases. At Prudhoe Bay, for
example, the lucky winners got some $50 billion worth of oil on leases costing only
$6 million (Gaffney, 1977a, p. 31). Oil spokesmen have published reams justifying this
by the costs of acquiring and sifting through dry leaseholds that were abandoned.

Now if the cost of abandoned leaseholds is part of the real cost of acquiring
producing ones, then it should be treated the same, tax-wise. But instead,
abandonment’s are expensed, along with most costs of exploration. The only outlay
capitalized is that for the specific lease that produces. Thus, some 80 percent of the de
facto cost of land acquisition is expensed at an early date. Disappointing leaseholds are
abandoned regularly, as in Baltimore Canyon in 1981, with “tax reasons” given as the
motive (LA Times, 1980). ;

Few other businesses have this avoidance avenue open to them on such a scale
because abandonment of land is not routine in other businesses[25]. Putting it all
together, the package of benefits is extraordinary: capital gains for winners, ordinary
loss deduction for losers, no limits, no pooling, no recapture, no constraints on
timing[26].

More fundamentally, the abandonment “loss” comes at the front end: it is really part
of the cost of acquiring assets, rather than a loss on selling them. The comparable
provision in other businesses would be to allow expensing 80 percent of capital
and land costs. The reform literature neglects abandonments entirely, so far as I know.
It is a gross oversight, especially now that lease acquisition has become the largest
single outlay of oil firms.
The relative weight of lease purchase in oil industry costs may be judged by these
data from the Joint Association Survey, available for 1974[27]. Lease acquisition then
had jumped to 38 percent of the total spending of the industry. In 1981, one single lease
sale (Santa Maria Basin) brought $2.27B in winning bids on 81 tracts. Tn 1980, a Gulf of
Mexico sale brought $2.6B.53 These two sales were a small fraction of total
acquisitions, but together added up to 86 percent as much as 364 reporting firms spent
in 1974. The treatment of leasehold payments is the weightiest question in oil tax law,
in dollar values.

Coal is comparable to petroleum in value, and in the degree of tax avoidance
through undervaluation. In the Appalachian coal states the underassessment of coal
reserves held by giant corporations and other absentees is a national scandal[28)
In the Rocky Mountain States maladministrators of the public domain have given
away billions of the national treasure under transparent pretexts. To recite the
details is beyond our present scope, but they are sordid to the max. If our Federal
Government could not tap our wages and salaries, it would have to, and could, raise
revenues from the immense natural resource values it now lets slip away to favored
private parties.

3.4 Element No. 8. Novel, unseen, and unrecognized lands

Novel kinds of natural resources, hitherto neglected or not classed with land, show
great revenue potential. Some examples are the radio spectrum; telecom relay sites;
slots in the geosynchronous orbit; fishing quotas; quotas on production and imports
and marketing; pollution permits; power drops; curb parking spaces; highway access;
mooring spaces; etc.

Any kind of franchise with a territorial component is a bite, large or small, of the
bundle of rights to land within the territory. Thus, the only liquor license in, say,
metropolitan Nashville, would have great monopoly value. Some franchises are
granted privately, e.g. by the Coca-Cola Bottling Company. They might be assessed as
being in restraint of trade. Others are granted by public law, e.g. a power
franchise over northern California. This could be assessed as a form of property
created by law.

To catalogue and measure all such forms of potentially taxable property is beyond
the scope of this paper. Fortunately, many able researchers have gone before, and we
will merely reference some of their work.

3.4.1 Radio spectrum. Radio spectrum is public domain and only wants better
administration and political support to yield huge public revenues. Levin long ago
published a detailed and definitive work explaining the technology of spectrum use, as
it existed then, with practicable ways of collecting the ever-growing rents (Levin, 1971).
He was a prophet without honor, as the shroud of “private property” dropped over
economic analysis. Congressman Lionel van Deerlin of San Diego championed the
cause, only to be unseated by a challenger enjoying heavy contributions from
established spectrum interests. Republican Presidential Candidate Robert Dole took up
the cause when he ran unsuccessfully in 1996. He ran and lost without strong support
from the Gingrich wing of his Party because of his concern with maintaining public
revenues and avoiding deficits.

Congress and the FCC in the 1990s went through the motions of auctioning
spectrum permits, but without challenging older permits. It generated publicity that

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

359

YJSE
36,4

360

barely hinted at what spectrum is worth, while vastly underestimating its total value.
It was like auctioning lots in the desert after giving away the beach-front. Now,
The New America Foundation is researching the value of spectrum. Researchers
Calabrese and Snider in 2003 estimated the value at $750 billion (Calabrese and Snider,
2003).

Advancing technology lets more signals be crowded on existing band-widths of the
natural resource. George Gilder predicted this was making spectrum so capacious it
would be worthless. Julian Simon has been saying much the same about all natural
resources (Simon, 1996). However, at the same time AT&T, thinking otherwise, paid
Craig McCaw $12 billion of their good money for his spectrum assignments. Gilder’s
position was like saying that engineering advances in big cities would devalue all the
land there, by producing elevators and pumps that let skyscrapers rise. There is some
logic for his case, but there is also logic against it, and experience, which tests logic,
shows it has not worked out on balance the way Gilder thought.

3.4.2 Fisheries. Fisheries are of course, public domain. Ferae naturae have long been
public under the common law, and the Public Trust Doctrine has applied to shallow
waters since the time of the Emperor Justinian. In recent years the
“Magnuson-Stevens” Act and its various renewals have created Individual Fishing
Quotas (IFQs). These have created a new class of “parlor fishermen”. The lucky
recipients may now treat working fishermen, and the capitalists who supply the boats
and gear, as sharecroppers. Buckley cites cases where the holder rents out his IFQ for
75 percent of the catch of cod, sablefish and halibut by longline fishers (Buckley, 1998).
Professor Seth Macinko, University of Rhode Island, confirms that 50-75 percent lease
shares are “commonplace”. The holders generally testify that the system works well,
while those excluded, although a majority, are not polled because they are no longer
“fishfolk”. They have joined the swelling ranks of Untermenschen.

Where new rents are carved out of the public domain, there is “rent-seeking”. Macinko
and Bromley (2002) attribute overfishing in part to fishermen having expected in the
past that licenses would be given in the future based on histories of use: a solution that
creates its own problem as individuals race to establish their future grandfatherhood.
It is not limited to fisheries: it has happened, and still happens, wherever a government
gives away its assets based on histories of use.

3.4.3 Littoral space. For fishermen, access to dry land is also vital, for unloading near
processing plants, and docks, slips, moorings, or ramps. Land-based fish processors
have acquired many of the new Fishing Quotas, freezing out actual fishermen entirely,
Yet there is another kind of competition for the littoral. On Long Island Sound, Macinko
writes that the “yachties” would crowd out the fisherfolk completely if the latter did not
receive federal subsidies to help with the rent{29]. In Key West Harbor, commercial
fishing and lobstering boats are nearly gone. Even recreational moorings are being
squeezed out by condos with “dockominiums.”

These rents run into billions. In Marina del Rey, CA, dockage for a slip may run at
$30 per lineal foot per month. For a 40’ slip that comes to $14,400 a year; capitalized at
4 percent[30] that values the space at $360,000: more than the boat, especially an older
boat. When such a dock is attached to a riparian lot, as in Newport Beach, it adds even
more to the value of the lot. Most yachts, after all, spend most of their time docked.
Owners jest that “a boat is a hole in the water into which one pours money”, but that is a
faux complaint that is more of a boast. Boats are emblems of social and pecuniary status.
As Adam Smith said, “the chief enjoyment of riches consists in the parade of riches”. For
that kind of enjoyment, some holes in the water are better than others. Veblen, of course,
elaborated on the theme and made “conspicuous consumption” part of the language.
Dockage in the right neighborhood commands superpremia.

Many marina’s are on city- or county-owned land. The operators pay rent to the
owners, as they should. However, officially posted rents are usually below the market,
for socio-political reasons. Old-timers are grandfathered in, and there have often been
political influence and “sweetheart” deals. So there is an active gray market where
newcomers buy their way in. The gray market price is, of course, the true value, and
the proper basis of valuation for rents or taxes.

There are about a million boats registered in California. They all need space, 24/7.
Some half of them overnight on dry land; others at docks or cheaper moorings whence
the sailors row to shore. Above-average docks now rent at $14,400 a year or more, as
shown above for Marina del Rey - which is far below the rents in premium spots like
Newport Beach, or anywhere near New York City.

But who can fit his boat into a 40 foot dock any more? Yachts keep getting bigger.
The big are crowding out the small, as the distributions of income and wealth grow
more skewed, nationwide and worldwide. Everywhere it is rivalry for limited space,
space, space in the right place, so rents keep rising.

In Morgan’s day, a 40 feet yacht was the ultimate. Next came superyachts, twice as
big; then megayachts of 150 feet or more. Now there are "gigayachts”. In 2005 there
were 651 mega- and gigayachts under construction, worldwide, on top of the existing
fleet. The longest one is 525 feet, for the Prince of Dubai, with Larry Ellison in hot
invidious pursuit. That’s about the size of a British Navy “dreadnought” class
battleship, which triggered off a world naval race after 1906. It is also the size of an
average cruise ship, but the private yacht is all for one person and his retinue. (An oil
supertanker is about 1,200 feet.) Some of the megayachts also pull tenders to house the
owner’s toys.

Commerce also needs vast littoral areas. The Port of Los Angeles preempts 7,500
acres, half of it water surface, including 43 miles of waterfront with 27 cargo terminals.
The adjoining twin Port of Long Beach is about the same size. Most of this space is
exempt from property taxes. The Port of Long Beach does not even pay rent to the City.
It internalizes some of its profits by goldplating its improvements; who knows where
else they go?

As ships grow longer they are pushing on the limits of harbor space and depth and
passageways. Even San Diego Harbor is too small for the longest ships to turn around.
Naval bases like San Diego and Alameda-Oakland and Pear] Harbor preempt and sterilize
long stretches of waterfronts and water surfaces. These lands, too, are tax exempt.

Meantime many large vessels sail under foreign “flags of convenience”, avoiding
American taxes. Oil firms transfer profits to low-tax nations to shelter income from US
taxes.

On inland lakes, frontage commands high premia. A large chunk of land value in
rural regions is not based on cash flow from food and fiber, or commercial fishing, but
on amenities. Wisconsin, for example, is a major playground for rich urbanites from
nearby Chicago, Milwaukee, Minneapolis and St Paul. “Use-value” assessment
exempts this chunk of value completely, for use-value is based on capitalizing the net
cash farm income from crops.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

361

IJSE
36,4

362

In the Wisconsin law it is one specific crop, com. Owners in Walworth County, near
Chicago and containing Lake Geneva, are big gainers. One creative shoreline owner in
Fontana on Lake Geneva divided his land into “dockominiums,” each consisting of
only a small lockbox on dry land, giving access to the lake. Each buyer paid $60,000.
Had these titles been valid, each $60,000 lockbox could have have been assessed based
on its potential corn crop.

The highest land values per capita in Wisconsin are in Vilas[31] County far up in the
north woods, once dismissed as worthless “cutovers.” Vilas’ acid podzol silvagenic
soils are worthless for corn, but sparkling lakes bedizen the County. Market values
per capita in Vilas are six times those in Milwaukee. Rich recreationists and “investors”
(read speculators) have gobbled up the “wild forties.” Shoreline parcels are like
diamonds among coal.

Salt beds compete with other uses for littoral space. One still observes the great
white sheets of the Leslie Salt Company when flying over the south end of
San Francisco Bay. More generally, though, great cities with their towering land prices
flourish and spread in littoral areas, and expand onto the seabed in shallow waters.
Many people refer offhandedly to landfill as “made land”, but no man made or can
make seabed or space. Some half of the original San Francisco Bay surface has been
taken for urban use, including two major airports, San Francisco southeast of Market
Street, Treasure Island, Foster City, and large swaths of other riparian cities. Large
parts of metropolitan Boston, including Logan Airport, have been taken from
Massachusetts Bay and other waters, shrinking them to the distress and loss of water
users and viewers.

3.4.4 Other variant kinds of land. Some dream that the third dimension can free
mankind from earthly bounds, but mankind has quickly sliced it into strata titles,
take-off and landing slots, and even a few geo-synchronous orbits, Some aircraft are
huge, but the small also require vast leeway for safety in the skies, resulting in routine
stack-ups and delays at peak-load hours. Even orbits in supposedly infinite outer space
are shrinking because one disintegrated space craft would leave thousands of
fragments of space junk menacing other ships in its whole orbit, over years or decades.
One bit of junk at high speeds could destroy another spacecraft, creating more
thousands of missiles, and so on in a lethal geometric progression, so we cannot
blithely assume that outer space is infinite. In addition, every spacecraft requires space
on the radio spectrum, another limited natural resource.

Airports themselves require vast areas of 2D space, tax-exempt, near cities with
high land values. Their areas keep growing as Boeing and Airbus provide us with
ever-larger jumbo’s. Circumnavigating even a small local airport can add 30 minutes to
an otherwise short trip. Every airport also generates a surrounding “footprint” of noise
and air pollution in constant conflict with the desires of residents.

Federal regulation preempts local power to tax aircraft landing slots, or tax aircraft
for pollution damages, while Federal subsidies pour gigabucks into airline
infrastructure, benefiting jet-setters and corporate executives and other air travelers
at the expense of median Americans. Here, is advice from Professor Kahn of Cornell,
the “Great Deregulator” of the airlines:

We are pricing those scarce spaces at congested airports at times of peak use insanely [.. .]
The landing fee at Washington National Airport, which is among the most precious pieces of
ground in the universe, is 57 cents a thousand pounds. That comes to between $2.75 and $6
for landing the small craft that my charter operator lands. And a maximum of $700 or $800
for a 727. That’s crazy. No wonder you have a shortage. No wonder planes are lined up and
queuing the way they do at a meat shop in Poland.

They should be charging thousands of dollars for their landing. That would translate into
maybe $25 or $40 a ticket. That means that the people to whom it’s important to land at that
very precious time and space will be able to do so without delays, weather permitting [. . .]
(Bradsher, 1987).

Those figures are from 1987; we should at least triple them for 2008.

3.5 Element No. 9 Unconventional de facto tenures now untaxed

The basic “plain vanilla” tenure is fee simple title[32]. Most estimates of rents and land
values limit their coverage to such traditional “property”. They thus omit other
valuable de facto tenures that should be part of a land value tax base, as measured by
economists.

3.5.1 Land-grabbing capital. Some capital serves its owners or users to preempt
public spaces and resources. An example is the wide, ever-lengthening trailer truck,
whose owners finance strong lobbies to legalize their preemption of public streets and
highways. Taxes on such vehicles, geared to dimension, weight, pollution, and miles
driven, would be a way of collecting rent for their use of public lands — and at the same
time inhibiting their growth.

Trucks are but one species of a large and varied genus that author John Keats called
“the insolent chariots”. Among passenger cars there are stretch limousines, beloved by
VIP politicians on the crowded narrow streets of Washington, DC. More epidemic are
wide-bodied, high-riding, big-tired SUVs, crowding or straddling the parking lines at
shopping lots. Even “ordinary” autos loom large relative to compact cars such as
pulled us out of the energy crises of the 1970s. Even compact cars intimidate, and thus
preempt space from cyclers, pedestrians, the lame, the halt, the deaf, and the blind.
They also clog streets and slow the movement of trolleys and buses. All of the above, of
course, preempt parking space on the streets, and in free private parking lots, more
than in proportion to their dimensions.

Thus, we should include all manner of vehicle taxes, fees and charges, including
gasoline taxes, as ways of collecting rent-revenue. Netzer (1966) has recommended
untaxing buildings per se, and replacing the lost revenue with “a family of
user-charges.” These charges would be geared to the marginal social cost (MSC) of
usage, on principles of marginal-cost pricing worked out by Hotelling and Vickrey and
others.

The idea of street revenues has been with us a long time. 100 years ago,
single-taxers considered traction franchises as a prime example of land value. Urban
single-taxers like Cleveland Mayor Tom L. Johnson, overlapping with Progressives,
often subordinated simple property tax reform to the cause of taxing franchises, and/or
capping fares (which is a kind of tax). For several decades now, latter-day Georgists
have pointed to parking meters as examples of public rent collection. In addition to
hogging space, oversized vehicles are “Veblen goods,” articles of ostentation and
conspicuous waste. Adam Smith favored taxing goods that served mainly “to parade
riches”. Even Henry George, who favored untaxing capital, agreed to this exception.

Ideally all such charges would be geared to the area and value of space occupied,
rather than to the value of the vehicles, but while we move toward that goal, almost any

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

363

IJSE
36,4

364

reasonable charge is better than none. We should count existing revenues as part of
current public rent-collections. We would count huge potential revenues, which far
exceed current ones, with taxable capacity that is untapped, but tappable.

Many voters perceive such taxes to be novel impositions by governmental tyrants:
such is the recent electoral reaction in Virginia and California. Some hyper-libertarian
economists brand such taxes as “interventions”, a common von Mises censure,
although they might rather be likened to a sports referee penalizing a foul. Perhaps,
this public has been conditioned by decades of P.R. from “the road gang”, consisting of
auto firms and dealers and bankers, oil firms and dealers and bankers, cement firms,
highway contractors, land speculators, tire companies, auto glass and paint and
component companies, auto insurance companies, certain law and engineering firms,
repair shops, and the whole train of allied businesses and professions integrated
horizontally, vertically, and in conglomerates. A highly audible PR agent is radio voice
Rush Limbaugh, whose monologues urging us to drive bigger vehicles and consume
more gas merge smoothly into his commercials for GM.

In fact, 80 years ago these “novel” charges were at higher rates than today, and
contributed a larger share of state revenues, even though autos and trucks were rare
and roads not crowded. “Motor fuel taxes dominated state tax revenues from 1927-45,
before being superseded by the general retail sales tax.” (Reeb and Howe, 1994).

Veblen, if writing today, would surely see our obeisance to otherwise ordinary
people in big cars as an atavism harking back to a peasant’s awe of the armed knight
on horseback. Our totem of “private property” makes a smail person as big as his car,
whose space needs assert lex fortions and command priority. Social and economic
thinking needs to overcome the psychology that “the car makes the man”.

The revenue potentials are impressive. There are about 200 million autos and light
trucks in the USA. As a rough cut, say the mean car runs 30,000 miles a year. That is
6 trillion miles. At 20 mpg, that uses 300 billion gallons. Taxing each gallon at $1.00
would yield $300 billion a year. That is from autos and light trucks alone. Other
vehicles would add more. Long, wide, unwieldy, space-hogging 18-wheelers with
fishtailing trailers and sleep-deprived drivers could rightfully be charged at higher
rates, and of course, each big-rig runs several hundred thousand miles a year. Each
right-angle turn preempts two lanes; each mile driven wears the pavement more than
lighter vehicles.

Higher tolls on bottlenecks, bridges, tunnels, CBD streets, and queued-up
confluences, using modern transponder technology, would add more revenues.
Vickrey has estimated total social costs of operating autos in CBDs at figures several
times higher than the values of the cars. Higher charges for curb parking would add
yet more, as Shoup has documented. They should be many times higher in CBDs and
other high-rent areas. If cities merely charged for curb parking what private garages
and lots already charge for offstreet parking, revenues would soar.

It might be thought that taxing transportation would lower rents on the served
lands, offsetting the rent revenues from charging vehicles. There is a grain of truth in
that, but more error. Economists working with traffic engineers have established that
such charges would actually increase the capacity of streets to move traffic. Shoup’s
work on curb parking has redocumented this recently. The major social cost imposed
by each vehicle is interfering with movement of other vehicles, and of pedestrians.
Roadhogging vehicles are only one genus of land-grabbing capital. Another kind is
the motorboat. Moving boats preempt much more space than their little area and
volume. One noisy motor boat can steal the peace from an entire lake. Fast power boats
occasionally maim and always frighten off swimmers, frighten lifeguards into roping
swimmers into limited areas sized for children, drive away those preferring quiet, make
wakes to disrupt other boaters and wildlife, and leave oil slicks. Such boats in such
places represent a kind of capital we should define and recognize as a class:
“land-grabbing capital”. Capital like that imposes a de facto partial tenure over the
nominally public and common water surface, and part of the foreshore as well. Failing
direct controls, it would make sense to tax such capital heavily — not as capital per se,
but for the land and water surface it takes[33].

The same rule should apply to tankers with single hulls, the kind that are prone to
spill frightful volumes of oil. Present remedies and constraints working through the
courts are totally inadequate. The owners of the ill-famed Exxon Valdez, for example,
in June 2008 were still in court trying to reduce damage claims for their 1989 spill in
Prince William Sound. They headed for the US Supreme Court, which meantime, in the
19-year wait for justice, has been packed with judges more sympathetic to their
viewpoint, On June 25 the High Court cut the punitive damages down by 90 percent.
Highly paid lawyers working for deep-pocketed polluters exhaust the resources of
ordinary plaintiffs by working the legal system indefinitely, at great cost.

There have been 66 comparable spills. Many economists, sadly, clock in on the
polluters’ side. First they “teach” everyone the Coase Theorem which equates Exxon’s
right to slime man and nature with the locals’ rights to stay clean.

Then they go further and raise Exxon’s rights above the locals’. What is the new
sleight-of-hand? It is pushing the “willingness to pay” (WTP) standard of “contingent
valuation” to price the damages, instead of the “willingness to accept” (WTA)
standard. WTP limits damages to what the locals would be willing and able to pay to
have a clean beach, as though they had no such right before the spill; WTA sets
damages at what sum the locals would require of Exxon to have sold them their clean
beach, a much higher figure(34]. We consider this further in Element No. 14, below.

Here, are examples of some other kinds of land-grabbing capital:

+ Aircraft preempting airspace, and landing/takeoff slots.

+ Satellites to meet usage requirements for allocations of spectrum and slots in
orbits.

+ Hunting and fishing equipment of superior power.

+ Financial capital used to absorb operating losses while establishing required
usage of future rent-yielding resources.

+ ATVsand snowmobiles preempting open lands, public or private, from other users.

+ Deepwell water pumps, sucking up more than their share of “fugitive”
percolating underground water, and establishing histories of use to grandfather
in the pumper later, when pumping shall be prorated.

+ Weirs to divert surface waters, to establish histories of use for future
prorationing. :

* Capital in fishing boats and nets, used as basis of prorating licenses.
- PA systems.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

365

IJSE
36,4

366

Radio pundit Rush Limbaugh speaks to a bumptious anarchistic streak in the
American psyche, roughly congruent with Chicago and neo-Austrian schools of
economics. He advises those who feel crowded by others’ “Urban Assault Vehicles” to
get their own, and fill them with Exxon gas, the bigger the better, to fight back in the
self-reliant way that made America great. By analogy, those troubled by noise from
loud parties with PA systems should fight back by buying and turning up their own
PA systems. My noise offsets your noise? It should be obvious what kind of “positive
feedback loop” that would create, and whither it would lead, and where, with respect to
vehicles and fishing boats and deepwell pumps and handguns in public housing
projects and AK-47’s in drug wars, it has led.

3.5.2 Zoning. Zoning is another form of quasi-tenure. To have the right zoning in the
right place at the right time is often worth more than the land without the zoning.
Favorable zoning should be considered part of the land tax base. Sometimes it is.
Hagman and Misczynski’s seminal work on Windfalls for Wipeouts (Hagman and
Misczynski, 1976) proposed taxing favorable zoning as property[35]. So did Clawson.

Unfavorable (low-density) zoning is usually a reason for lowering assessed values to
the maximum value of uses that the zoning allows. This becomes a master tax dodge
when the de jure zoning is only nominal and is easily broken. It is normal for sales
prices of land zoned for a lower use to reflect buyers’ expecting or hoping to convert it
to a higher use. In order for the property tax to serve its function of taxing unrealized
capital gains at the time they accrue, it must be based on market values of ripening
land in ecotones (“zones of supersession” is the more cumbersome expression used by
land economists).

Free trade zones around airports or ocean ports impart a premium value to land
therein, based on an exclusive privilege that should be taxed as rent[36]. Firms located
inside the zone may import parts duty-free, assemble, and export them. The idea has
spread, so now we have “Enterprise Zones” that allow special city and state aids to
industries in the chosen lands. We have the popular tax increment financing (TIF)
zones wherein new buildings are tax exempt. When the resulting upsurge in land
values raises revenues they are all plowed back into the TIF zone, depriving other
parts of town, even when the new uses are “locally undesirable land uses’s” (LULU),
and even when the funds would be more productive elsewhere. It is a promising idea
that has been narrowed and perverted to benefit a few, in the sadly common American
way. Landowners inside the TIF zone get the increment; others get the excrement.

3.5.3 Grandfathering. The grandfathering custom says that land uses, once
established, may be continued, even though they become illegal for others similarly
situated. This would make more sense if the grandfather right itself were taxed as
valuable real estate[37]. As it is, it creates an incentive to establish a LULU early on,
before it is banned, to establish one’s future grandfatherhood. We have seen in (Section
3.4.4), above, how Macinko and Bromley attribute overfishing to this effect.

3.5.4 Licensing. We have covered licenses to withdraw surface waters under the
doctrine of prior appropriation. In the dry western states water per se is often worth
more than dry land. As water grows more scarce and limitational, the value of these
licenses might grow to rival that of land surfaces themselves.

Other licenses are so many we mention just a few, to exemplify the genus.
In Riverside County, California, a liquor license trades for $70,000. There are many
kinds of licenses for selling special goods and services that are in general prohibited:
gambling, prescription drugs, medical services, taxi service, vending on city streets
and sidewalks, etc. Numerous other licenses are required to practice professions or run
businesses that are thought, rightly or wrongly, to require supervision or certification
or limited entry. Some of these are of only trivial value, but others are very dear, and
important to include in any measure of rent as a base for public revenue. All of them
are territorial, in force only within the jurisdiction that issues them. That makes them
like a covenant over all land use in the jurisdiction, hence part of the land tax base.

By general agreement, patent protection has far outgrown its public purpose of
fostering useful inventions. The system has been gamed and abused at least since
Edison, an early patent bully. Copyright protection has gone to foolish extremes, filled
with abuses. There is a wide literature covering these subjects.

3.6 Element No. 10 Salvaging rents now being dissipated

3.6.1 Dissipation by open access and crowding. We have seen how open access to streets
and highways and curb parking dissipates the potential rents that arise from
crowding. In general, “crowding” is a shorthand way of observing that a resource or
facility is used in the stage of increasing social costs, where MSC is greater than
average social cost (MSC > ASC). The excess of social cost over private cost is the
effect of crowding.

Early single-tax traditions arose in expansive pioneering conditions where many
public facilities were oversized, in expectation of growing demand. Even if they were
originally undersized there was room to override them with bigger, newer versions of
lower average fixed cost. For example, some early dams were drowned out by higher
dams below them.

The philosophy and formal theory of “Marginal Cost Pricing”, developed by
Hotelling, Vickrey, and others, tells us that, under excess capacity, MSC is low, and
below ASC. In these conditions we should tax rents from the benefited lands to pay for
public facilities like roads and utilities. Often the rough-and-ready formula, requiring
no theorizing, has been to finance the fixed capital with general obligation (GO) bonds
(liens on land), resorting to user charges only to meet variable costs. Often the latter
were lower than the cost of collection, and so not imposed at all.

Such a tradition dies hard, both in practice and in doctrines. Free open access has
been a substitute for a more egalitarian tax system, a consolation for losers in the race
to fence off land. Thus, many fight user fees at overcrowded National Parks thinking
that parks serve to assuage the poor in kind for fencing them out of the mass of private
lands. Hunting and gun lobbies play to the same tradition; canny forest owners, to keep
their taxes low, have long drawn needed political support from hunters by allowing
them access. Well-head price controls on oil and gas were imposed for years in the
USA, and still are in some other countries, with the feeling that there is a public equity
in subsoil resources found under private lands.

Now, however, many facilities are crowded, hence in the stage of increasing ASC,
where MSC > ASC. Roadways are jammed and gridlocked; water supplies are short;
power “wheeling” (transmission) is a bottleneck, and usable plant sites are hard to find.
These are land shortages: widening city streets nibbles on the very lands the streets are
there to serve; water is economic land, Le. a limited natural resource. A narrow copper
wire may not seem to need much space, but high-voltage power lines take up ROWs
wider than streets and highways as they criss-cross city and country lands; power

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

367

IJSE
36,4

368

stations pollute surrounding airs and waters — limited natural resources — without
compensating the neighbors, who of course, oppose having them near, on the NIMBY
principle. Nuclear Generating Stations impose so much risk over such a wide area they
could not even afford to exist without the special protection of the Price-Anderson Law.
It exempts them from public liability.

Thus, facilities that once mainly shed rents on other lands now also yield rents
themselves: the excess of price over marginal cost. Sometimes the undercapacity is
short-run only and is curable by adding or upsizing hardware. Often today, though, it
is long run average social costs (LRASCs) that are increasing with demand, because the
land or resource input is the main limiting bottleneck.

In addition, many natural resources are crowded beyond their carrying capacity,
giving an impression of Malthusian scarcity. Many economists quickly embraced
Hardin’s “Tragedy of the Commons” phrase to express the idea, which is now common
coin. Sadly, most writers use this tragedy just to rationalize privatization, rather than
the taxation that should accompany it. Major think-tanks, supposedly benign and
objective, are funded by the very interests that oppose taxation.

There is high revenue potential from user charges on road crowding, water
withdrawals from surface and underground sources, minerals extraction, air and water
pollution, spectrum use, fish catches, billboards, and so on. Some of these are major
additions to land revenues. For example, California, a major oil-producing state, does
not even have a severance tax, not even a token. In the fiscal crisis and Recall
melodrama of 2003, 136 candidates ran for Governor, but only one (Arianna
Huffington} even mentioned it, so total is the mental blackout. As for pollution charges,
we have seen towering estimates of their revenue potential from Barnes, Costanza, and
others Gection 3.3.2). States already raise heavy revenues from taxing tobacco.

Products that cause damage, anti-social behavior, and inflated demand for
publicly-subsidized medical care may reasonably be taxed. Our most lucrative
agricultural industry, pot, would provide high tax yields, should we decide to legalize it
instead of trying vainly to suppress it. It is worth remembering that before the
16th Amendment, when excise taxes supported the US Government, liquor supplied a
high fraction of all the revenues. As a by-product we would save the high public costs
of the “narcocracy,” the counter-industry that depends on drug-users for its very
existence. We would save a substantial fraction of the money spent on jails and
warding. This would make a splendid example of trading “Negabucks for Megabucks.”

3.6.2 Dissipation by rent-seeking while tenuring. It is the custom for governments to
give away valuable lands and resources to the first users or settlers, conditioned on
priority and continued use. The resulting waste offsets much of the future rents, by
premature use and racing to be first. Settling the American west under the Preemption
and Homestead Acts in the nineteenth century is a case in point, well documented in
song and story (but without much economic insight). Here, much of the waste took the
form of human suffering. The wives of Norwegian immigrants, forced into isolated
farmsteads during the awful winters of Minnesota and the Dakota’s, suffered terribly.
Thorstein Veblen, a child of such immigrants, alludes to the problem in his Absentee
Ownership. Ole Rolvaag’s novel, Giants in the Earth, detailed the psychic costs for the
sympathetic readers of the great depression. Teachers assigned it to high school
students, but now it is lost in the snowdrifts of time: how quickly we put aside the costs
born by others, which later generations can hardly understand.
Meting out licenses to the radio spectrum in “lean territory”, subject to use
requirements, is a similar story in a new technological environment. Operators are
willing to lose money for years in order to firm up future licensure as people and
demand spread out, as they have been. Tax-wise, these losses are deductible as current
expenses, although in fact they are costs of acquiring land from the government, land
of permanent and rising value. They are also a pure social loss, both private and public
— a public asset turned into a public and private liability. This whole tragedy would be
turned around by the simple measure of taxing the licenses, turning “Negabucks into
Megabucks” for the Treasury.

Insider economists tuned into rent-seeking some 30 years ago, it seems — Anne
Krueger (1974) usually gets the credit, although Gordon Tullock claims priority from
1967. At any rate, the phenomenon and therefore the concept have been around a long
time. Their examples are safely trivial, in the manner of academicians. None of them
says much about the monster wastes involved in racing for prior rights to water, to
fisheries, to spectrum, to petroleum, to homesteads, and to other natural resources as
the trustees of our public domain privatize it in what Kahn calis “insane” ways.

Here, is the example of water. Scarce waters, where demand exceeds supply, yield
rent. With demand growing, even abundant waters, where demand is now low, are
expected to become scarce, and yield future rents. Waters currently rentable are
expected to yield still higher rents. In anticipation, persons and organizations with an
eye to future rents are ready to do what is needed today to lay claim to future waters.

“What is needed today,” by case law, is to divert water and put it to “beneficial use.”
This is the prevailing appropriative doctrine of water law, under which no one pays a
state to take its water, now or in the future. Rather, one acquires a permit that ripens
into something resembling perpetual ownership, by the very process of taking. In
practice, “beneficial use” is a token, an economic bad joke. Taking is the essence. Local
water boosters call this “foresight,” and hail it as a cardinal virtue. “Use” may be
wasteful, and often is.

This appropriative doctrine is the locus classicus of “rent-seeking,”, i.e. distorting
present investment to secure future rents. The motive is to divert, develop and half-use
water before its economic time, to lay claim to its future.

The concept of “prescriptive rights” is even more perverse. Here, ownership is
established essentially by “adverse use,”, ie. interfering with someone else’s use. The
taker's beneficial use becomes even more incidental. In 1949 the California Supreme
Court triggered a “race to the pump house” (Krieger and Banks, 1962) when it
proclaimed the doctrine of “mutual prescription” for groundwater basins (City of
Pasadena v. City of Alhambra, 1949). This “encouraged defensive ground water
overdrafting by pumpers in other basins who anticipated ground water adjudication”
(Gleason, 1977).

Modern privatizers tell us to firm up property rights. Accepting existing
entitlements is their first step; then, and only then will the market work its magic. They
glide too easily over the process of firming up. They offer no process but giveaway to
privatize resources. Yet, claims to water are constantly being made, expanded and
firmed up, and any giveaway process violates the virtues a market is supposed to
possess. Indeed, giveaway is the essential precondition for “rent-seeking” behavior
which, in other realms, economists deplore. The rule for prior appropriators and

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

369

IJSE
36,4

370

adverse possessors is particularly counterproductive: “Waste today, want not
tomorrow[38}.”

There is a better way. A policy of taxing water withdrawals (as advocated herein),
based on the opportunity cost of water, will do the job without giving away the public
domain to private usurpers (Gaffney, 1992b). That does mean our own governments
must take a hand and assess the market value of water, probably using existing county
assessors. It is that or the absentee speculators. Thus, far, the choice has gone to the
speculators; the results are neither just nor efficient.

3.7 Element No. 11 Rent gains from abating other taxes: the concept of all taxes come
out of rents (ATCOR)

The meaning and relevance of ATCOR is that when we lower other taxes, the revenue
base is not lost, but shifted to land rents and values, which can then yield more taxes.
This is most obvious with taxes on buildings. When we exempt buildings, and raise
tax rates on the land under them, we are still taxing the same real estate; we are just
taxing it in a different way. We will show that this “different way” actually raises the
revenue capacity of real estate by a large factor. There is much recent historical
experience with exempting buildings from the property tax, in whole or part. It has
shown that builders offer more for land, and sellers demand more, when the new
buildings are to be untaxed. The effect on revenue is the same as taxing prospective
new buildings before they are even built, even though the new buildings are not to be
taxed at all.

Land value is what the bare land would sell for. It is specifically and immediately
most sensitive to taxes on new buildings, and on land sales, as well as to new and
stricter building codes or zoning that often discriminate against new buildings.
Lowering the income tax rate on the prospective capital gain in land sales contributes
also to the marathon runup of our times in land prices. ~

3.7.1 Examples of ATCOR from experience. The writer has assembled data from
the histories of New York City, Hong Kong, Taiwan, major cities in Australia and
South Africa, San Francisco after the fire, Chicago in its Progressive Era, California
Irrigation Districts after the LL. Dennett reforms of 1909, Vancouver under eight-term
Mayor Edward Denison “Single-tax” Taylor, Cleveland under Mayors Tom Johnson
and Newton D. Baker, Toledo under Mayors Samuel Jones and Brand Whitlock, Detroit
under Mayor Hazen Pingree, Portland, Oregon, under the indirect influence of Wm.
S. U’Ren[39], Seattle under Mayor George Cotterill, Houston under the ministrations of
single-tax Assessor JJ. Pastoriza, San Diego under Assessor Harris Moody, and much
of western Canada in the era of “Single-tax Taylor” (Gaffney, 1970a, 2007b).

In all those cases untaxing buildings while uptaxing land resulted in higher land
prices. The writer has documented this in the work cited. Professor Robert Murray Haig
of Columbia University documented it in his 1915 report on the exemption of
improvements from taxation in Canada and the USA (Haig, 1915). Haig actually faulted
the system for failing to hold down land prices, as some of its champions had erroneously
hoped and promised it would, but the relevant point here is that it raised land prices, the
new tax base.

New York City exempted new dwellings up to a moderate ceiling value for ten
years, 1921-1931. The result?:
There has been a tremendous increase in land assessments since 1920 in all the boroughs [. . .] The hidden

The resumption of building has greatly increased the taxable value of the land, which is not
included in the exemption [...] Tax exemption is creating aggregate taxable values fo an

taxable capacity

extent heretofore unknown in the history of any municipality added[40] (emphasis added). of land

We also observe the ATCOR principle at work in many analogous situations:
+ Lowering the corporate income tax rate raises stock prices.
* Lowering interest rates raises real estate prices.

* Commercial rents are multipartite, and a lower share of gross revenues means a
higher fixed rent.

* Oil leases are multipartite, and a higher fixed royalty rate means lower bonus
bids.

+ Wartime taxes depress land prices, while peace dividends let them rise again.
There is a long world history of peace dividends followed by land booms.

* The resource curse effect: an influx of mineral revenues, obviating other taxes,
leads to land booms.

* The remarkable productivity of the US income tax when wages were exempt,
1916-1930, and we paid for World War I with less deficit finance than any other
belligerent.

* The utility-rate effect: lower rates mean higher rents and land prices, as observed
in practice and explained in theory by Hotelling, Vickrey, Stiglitz, Feldstein, and
others.

3.7.2 The logic of ATCOR. The thesis that all taxes are shifted to landowners follows
from three major premises. One, the supply of land is fixed inside every tax
jurisdiction, by definition. Two, after-tax interest rates are determined by world
markets, so the local supply of capital is perfectly elastic at a fixed, after-tax rate.
Three, labor is also quite mobile — that is how most of our ancestors got here, and then
migrated and continue to move all over North America, not to mention switching jobs
in the same city. Many of the “top ten cities” of 1900 can hardly make the top.50 today,
while many of today’s top ten were not even on the radar in 1900.

In Ricardo’s time much English labor was too poor to emigrate easily, but he and
the English Exchequer observed that labor subsisted at so low a level that it could not
bear any taxes. Taxes in the form of the corn laws that raised the price of bread were
shifted to employers who had to raise wages to keep their workers alive. This is an
essential link in classical political economy. Today some 30 million Americans
experience hunger and malnutrition, as in Ricardo’s time. Today, though, they also
have the choice of surviving on welfare, miserable though that is, again making for an
elastic supply.

Keynes could assume an elastic labor supply drawn from a large pool of
unemployed — his version of Marx’s “reserve army”. Thus, in Keynes’ demand-side
macro model higher aggregate demand makes more jobs rather than raising wage
rates. This model dominated macro thought for 50 years, and keeps popping up still in
the implicit models behind verbal analyses that supposed “supply-siders” deliver. The
supply of “work” (as opposed to “labor,” defined as so many warm bodies) is highly
elastic so long as there are unemployed. When we find work for the unemployed and

IJSE
36,4

372

underemployed, labor gains without its costing land or capital anything. Property even
gains because of lower dole costs, lower crime costs, and lesser social dissatisfaction
and rebelliousness. The enhanced psychic benefit of universal job security is also
worth a lot. When Keynesianism was in flower, many alleged that the social cost of
putting the unemployed to work is zero.

Nowadays Keynes is out of style with the dominant anti-labor schools.
Unemployment was the bogey of the Great Depression era, and full employment the
master goal, but times have changed. Fashionable Chicago-school patois now makes
unemployment simply “leisure”, just another good one consumes like butter or shampoo,
a voluntary choice, a matter of personal “taste”. And yet leading Chicagoan Gary Becker
freely postulates elastic labor supplies when he routinely blames unemployment on
minimum wage laws (Becker, 1995). “It’s simple”, he opines. “Hike the minimum wage,
and you put people out of work’[41]. That assumes an elastic labor supply, as workers
move in and out of the “reserve army of the unemployed”.

Were we to tax land more and production and consumption and capital less, real
wage rates would rise, as better land use and more investing increased demand for
labor and lowered product prices. This was the theme of Progress and Poverty, and the
primary goal of George’s reforms. He likened the land market, beset by imperfections
like speculation, to an unconscious universal cartel withholding much good land from
full use, forcing labor and investors out to worse land.

That was even before we had heavy payroll and income taxes on labor. Now, it is
entirely possible for banishing such taxes to let after-tax wage rates rise while
before-tax wage rates do not. There is ample “room” in the present tax system for that
to be a possible outcome.

In the event, however, that real wage rates should rise enough to absorb some of the
gains from tax reform, it would not lower tax revenues from land. The rise of wages in
the Georgist system implies a rise of GDP. The rise would result from removing the
excess burdens of current taxes, which in turn will first raise the marginal productivity
of labor. That would ensue from opening the “internal frontier”. One can also view that
as ending the artificial scarcity of land. This means that workers who now each add,
say, $20,000 a year to GDP in menial tasks, or struggling on marginal land, would
instead add $40,000 a year each. While this would redistribute income against rents,
much of the increase would come from a net rise of GDP.

The net rise of GDP will raise the demand for land for residential and recreational
(R&R) uses, because land for R&R is a “superior good”. That means that doubling
incomes more than doubles demand for land for R@R. Adam Smith observed that in
1776; George saw it in 1879 (George, 1879), and we have illustrated it above for modern
times. Lowering after-tax rents will, to be sure, lower the R&R demand for land, but
raising other factor shares, including rates of return on real investing, will replace the
lost demand from any given GDP. The rise of GDP will more than replace it.

Even in small closed economies, there is also another kind of “reserve army”, that of
capital, misallocated or underemployed. This is because the cash return is taxed, so
owners park slack money in consumer capital yielding untaxed implicit income as
“service flows”, and in eleemosynaries, foundations, government works, sterile
personal property like yachts, “bling-bling” and arty property like precious gems and
overpriced paintings, and relatively undertaxed housing. From this would spring a
large supply, if all uses of capital were untaxed, because all capital is fungible each
time it turns over. Here, is more elasticity in the supply of capital, even in a closed
economy[42]. During World War II civilians in the USA and other belligerents lived a
massive example of how people can draw down consumer capital to meet an
emergency need. For 15 years up to 1946, Americans lived in dwellings built before
1931, which simply aged without replacement.

Most modern economists observe elastic capital supply, but only in selected
contexts. They write of world markets, rapid transfers, and arbitrage. But early
anti-Georgists, in their zeal to protect land from taxation, left a heritage of justifying
taxes on capital. When Seligman was bending the twig of modern tax theory, he
expressed his point memorably: “There is no fund of capital floating in the air to be
brought to earth by the magic touch of Mr George”[43]. Today, Chicago tax economist
Arnold Harberger replicates Seligman by promoting his “new view” of the property tax
wherein taxing capital nationwide does not lower aggregate capital. This leads to the
anomaly that Chicago economists favor taxing capital, while dismissing those who
would untax capital as “radical” and “confiscatory”. Images, connotations, and
associations have trumped meaning and reality.

Modern Marxists have their own way of following Seligman. Untaxing new
investing appears to raise investing, they allow, but they hold that this rise is really
just borrowing from the future: more today means less tomorrow. Over time, they say,
the flow is a fixed “lump”, undiminished by taxation. I will show, rather, that the
“lump” is full of yeast and can grow:

* by capital formation;

* by better allocation of capital;

* by import of capital, and especially;
* by faster turnover of capital.

This last point played a major role in the classical political economy that derived from
Turgot and Physiocracy, and preoccupied Marx himself in Book II of Das Kapital, and
Keynes in the Treatise on Money, and various Austrian economists over 150 years.
Austrians Roger Garrison and Mark Skousen expound it ably today, but many
conventional economists today do not seem to get it. They rather follow Clark,
Frank Knight, and George Stigler, who did their best to bury the idea. In matters of
taxation most economists rallied behind the 1986 tax reform where the catchword was
“uniformity”. In theory that meant tax all sources of income at the same rate, removing
all Heller’s incentives for new investing, even though Ronald Reagan had restored
them in his first administration.

In practice 1986 was even worse, it meant sunsetting Heller’s reforms while keeping
and expanding most loopholes for land income. For one brief year, “capital gains” were
taxed at the same rate as “ordinary” income, but President George H.W. Bush devoted
his entire administration to restoring the difference. It was so important to him that he
sacrificed many other objectives, including a second term, to achieve a difference of
just one percentage point. Why? It was the thin end of a wedge that has now driven the
tax rate down to 15 percent in 2008.

Land value is based at all times on the “opportunity cost” (or best alternative use) of
land in its highest future use. The value of this alternative rises by a big factor when
future buildings are to be untaxed. The tax relief is tomorrow, but the land value rises

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

373

IJSE
36,4

374

today, however sorry and shabby and dated the buildings in place now. This calls for
drastic reassessment of land today when future buildings are to be exempted.
The effect on revenues is like taxing future buildings before they exist, although they
are not to be taxed at all - indeed, Because they will not be taxed at all. This is the
market logic behind what happened in the growing boroughs of New York City in the
1920s, and caused Clarence Stein to exclaim, “Tax exemption is creating aggregate
taxable values to an extent heretofore unknown in the history of any municipality”.

In addition, more compact settlement, a child of the new policy, would create new
rents via the synergies that are now aborted by scatter.

3.7.3 The ATCOR tradition in economic thought. What we call ATCOR was central
to the thinking of the French économistes of the eighteenth century Enlightenment.
Economists today, if they are aware of it, refer to it by their name, as the “Physiocratic
theory of tax incidence”. Jacob Vanderlint and John Locke preceded the French, who in
turn spread the idea widely among the classical political economists.

Adam Smith, a student of Turgot and Quesnay, deplored the “indolence of
landowners” that keeps them from seeing the principle, for then they would see that
they hurt themselves the most by shunting taxes off land and onto labor, capital, trade,
and production. Taxes on useful activity are shifted to rents, he observed, and more:
such taxes impose excess burdens that are also shifted to rents (a point we take up
next). Other classical economists, with varied emphasis, saw the same points. (For a
reservation about Smith’s point, see Section 3.9.4).

More recently we find the same insight in works by Douglas, Bronson Cowan,
Ebenezer Howard, David Bradford, Dick Netzer, and others[44]. Harold Hotelling and
Vickrey have made much of how lower transit and utility rates are capitalized into
higher land values, and a few prominent modern economists like Feldstein and Stiglitz
have followed Vickrey in writing on “The Henry George Theorem”. Many other
economists, sad to say, spin out their theories innocent of the ATCOR principle and the
premises behind it, for they are trained to screen out any thoughts based on
distinguishing immobile land from mobile capital.

3.74 The muddied waters of modern theory.

3.7.4.1 Forward shifting of taxes. Many economists have all taxes, like an excise tax,
imposed on a sale of a “commodity”. Then it is split between amorphous buyers and
sellers. At no point do they distinguish among the factors of production on the “supply
curve”. They make land supply as elastic as any other because land can shift among
uses. At no point do they face the basic premises of ATCOR, that land is fixed inside
any taxing jurisdiction, by definition, while labor and capital in the aggregate are
highly elastic.

Musgrave, who trained and swayed so many prominent tax economists of today,
applied this model to the property tax on housing[45], as though a property tax on the
land in housing is automatically shifted to tenants. It is what Howard Jarvis seized on
in 1978 when he promised tenants that lowering property taxes would automatically
lower their rents, since property owners, as he put it, do “not pay one cent” in property
taxes, but shift them all to tenants. As soon as Proposition 13 passed rents shot
upwards, and have never looked back (except in the volatile micro-market of cyclical
Silicon Valley).

This is one result of displacing production theory by price theory in economic
doctrines. In production theory you would assume elastic demand, and focus on the
effect on factor proportions (changing productive processes and products, a ia Kneese
and Bower).

3.7.4.2 Making capital stand still. John B. Clark, who devoted much of his career to
abusing Henry George, equated capital and land by the device of modeling only a
“static” economy in which the supply of capital is fixed, by assumption[46]. He devoted
another chunk of his life to chipping away at Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk for the
Austrian solecism of focusing on how fast capital turns over. Clark made a point that
capital does not turn over at all, thus again helping to erase a difference of capital and
land. The meaning for tax policy, driven home by Clark’s colleague and Chair Seligman
and by Charles Spahr, is that we should not untax capital while taxing land.

Chicagoan Arnold Harberger disagreed with Musgrave et al, but by an equally
fallacious route that he and others modestly called “the new view” of property taxation
as they revived Seligman, Adams, and Clark. Harberger has the supply of capital fixed,
like land, again melding land and capital. This is the Chicago-school position.

3.7.4.3 Abusing the Ramsey rule. Ramsey, mentored by Pigou, in 1927 published a
Rule for avoiding excess burdens in taxation. The Rule is that taxes should be
inversely proportional to elasticities, whether of supply or demand. Putting it
positively, taxes should be higher on tax bases that cannot escape the tax. This Rule
leads directly to land value as the best tax base. Ramsey, a cautious young
academician, left it to his readers to see that point, but then died young, so there it
rests. The point, however, is plain as day (Ramsey, 1927).

Most of his readers, however, failed him. His Rule has become a standard feature of
works on public finance, but the authors leave out the supply side. McLure and
Zodrow, for one example of many, cite Ramsey as saying that tax rates should be
inversely proportional to demand elasticities (McLure and Zodrow, 1994), never
mentioning supply. The result is that many well-read and well-meaning economists
believe the Ramsey Rule applies to demand elasticities only.

The rare correct reference is by Joseph Stiglitz, who writes that the “Ramsey tax rate
is proportional to the sum of the reciprocals of the elasticities of supply and demand”
(emphasis added) (Stiglitz, 1986, pp. 403-4). Some readers’ eyes may glaze over at the
verbalized mathematics, but think about this one. Stiglitz mentions both demand and
supply. The supply elasticity of land is zero; the reciprocal is infinity. So the rule leads
us right to an infinite (or very high) tax rate on land.

Consistently, Stiglitz adds that:

[...] the burden of the tax on capital is not felt, in the long run, by the owners of capital. It is
felt by land and labor [, . .]. in the long run, workers will emigrate [.. .] this leaves land as the
only factor that cannot emigrate [. . .] the full burden of the tax is borne by land owners in the
long run. [...] While a direct tax on land is nondistortionary, all the other ways of raising
revenue induce distortions (Stiglitz, 1986, pp. 567-68).

The Rule goes on that nothing should be taxed at all if there is an alternative tax base
whose supply or demand is more inelastic. Here, is Pigou, Ramsey’s tutor:

By analogous reasoning it can be shown that, when one source of production yields an
absolutely inelastic supply, [...] a given revenue can be raised with less sacrifice by
concentrating taxation upon this use than by imposing uniform rates of tax on all uses [...]
If there is any commodity for which either the demand or the supply is absolutely inelastic,
the formula implies that the rate of tax imposed on every other commodity must be nil, ie.
that the whole of the revenue wanted must be raised on that commodity (Pigou, 1928).

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

375

IJSE
36,4

376

Allyn Young, reviewing Pigou in 1929, quotes him that tax rates should “become
progressively higher as we pass from uses of very elastic demand or supply (emphasis
added) to uses where demand or supply (emphasis added) are progressively less
elastic.” Young continues, “This suggestion is joined (by Pigou) to Mr Ramsey’s
findings (Young, 1929; Musgrave and Peacock, 1959). Allyn Young, unlike modern text
writers, had no problem understanding Ramsey and Pigou and citing them straight.

It appears that Pigou and Ramsey were willing to follow their predecessor
Alfred Marshall and endorse the ideas of Henry George, provided they could do so ina
suitably obscure and indirect academic way[47], not mentioning George, and avoiding
all the slings and arrows their colleagues, and Marshall himself, had once directed at
George ad hominem.

What about zero demand elasticities (vertical demand curves)? Are there such
things? If there were, each one would make an infinite tax base. It would mean that we
could raise tax rates to the blue sky, and buyers would not slack their purchases but
pay whatever the seller charged. Obviously that cannot be. Vertical demand curves are
conceivable within short reaches of a demand curve. Above that, high prices cut
demand by impoverishing buyers. In Economese this is an income effect. That is, a
high tax taken from a buyer lowers her real income (and wealth and liquidity, too) so
that even if she is a, say, drug addict, buying compulsively at any price, she is soon
broke.

3.8 Summary on ATCOR

The revenue capacity of land, when it is substituted for other tax bases, is comparable
to current revenues. Owing to efficiency effects, and renewal effects, it is actually
higher, as shown next in Element No. 12. The major reservation is that the supply of
labor is not totally elastic, so some of the revenue gains may be “lost” in higher wage
rates, but on the whole higher wage rates are socially desirable, and serve to lower
many public costs as for welfare, policing and jailing, aggressive military spending,
make-work projects, etc.

3.9 Element No. 12 Gains to rent from removing excess burdens: the concept of EBCOR
(Excess Burdens Come Out of Rents)

3.9.1 Logic of the EBCOR effect. “Excess Burdens Come Out of Rents” (EBCOR), so
removing them adds to rents. Alfred Marshall saw that clearly, but his cautious motto
that “Nature makes no leaps” trapped him in a creeping marginalism that still confines
conventional neo-classical analysis. There are important marginal benefits from
removing excess burdens, it is true, but the greater benefits are more than marginal
because they entail quantum leaps from lower to higher uses of land. Again, these
benefits accrue to rents and land prices.

A common neo-classical saw is that public policy is a tradeoff between efficiency
and equity. Applied to land tenure that identifies “equity” with Hardin’s idea of “the
commons”, with its tragedy of crowding and depletion. Applied to taxation that
identifies “equity” with progressive income taxation, with its disincentive effects and
misallocation of resources. Neoclassicals urge us to give up common rights and/or
progressive taxation, to enjoy the benefits of secure land tenure and the prosperity
flowing from incentives in a free market.
As George showed, however, we can have both the common rights and the
incentives, through tax reform, but the point is stronger than that: we cannot have one
without the other. We must support government from land revenues to have a truly
free market, because without taxing land we must tax work, production, trade, and
capital formation, distorting, weakening, and possibly destroying free markets. The
obvious manifestation and measure of that excess burden is shunting land from more
to less intensive and productive uses, as we will show in detail.

The very people who gave us the slogan /aissez-faire made socializing land rents a
central part of their program. These were the eighteenth century French économistes,
sometimes called “Physiocrats,” who were the tutors of Adam Smith. They inspired
land reforms throughout Europe until stifled after 1815 by The Holy Alliance led by
Metternich. They also inspired more enduring land reforms in the USA, through their
influence on many Founding Fathers, including Franklin, Jefferson and the long
dynasty of Jeffersonians who followed him. The best-known économistes were
Francois Quesnay and A.R. Jacques Turgot, who championed land taxation. Walras,
their militant disciple, called it the “co-proprietorship of land by the state”.

Since their time we have learned to measure land values, and we have broadened the
meaning of “land” to comprise all natural resources. Farmland per se, which they
emphasized too much, ranks well down the list in terms of total market value. A land
tax is not primarily a tax on farmland that produces food and fiber and fuel, as shown
earlier. That is an old idea that dies hard, even though obsolete.

In addition, if we untax work, trade and capital we thereby add a great deal to the
value of land on which one may now work, trade and build free of the former taxes, and
free of their excess burdens: a double gain to land rents. The net advantages of doing
so are our theme here.

Conventional analysis of excess burdens uses the model of an excise tax in a
commodity market. Supplies of land, labor, and capital are melded in a commodity
supply curve in which even land supply is elastic because it may be shifted from
producing other commodities and services. Excess burden is shown as the area of a
trivial little triangle where supply and demand curves cross. These have become
known as “Harberger Triangles” (although they antedate Harberger). The analyst then
assumes he may aggregate these for the whole economy, Heaven knows how. Then the
analyst dismisses excess burdens as minor.

The mode! does not fit the case. It does not deal with a whole taxing jurisdiction,
within which supplies of labor and capital are highly elastic, and of land perfectly
inelastic. It does not show how taxes prevent quantum leaps into higher land uses, as
from parking lots to high-rise apartments, or from 80-year old firetraps to modern
offices, or from ancient generators with fireboxes leaking pollutants to modern ones
with the latest environmental safeguards.

The method here is to infer the biasing effects of taxes from their differential effects
on rents of rival uses for land. A local tax jurisdiction is an open economy. The
simplifying premises here are that arbitrage equalizes all after-tax rates of return on
new investing, at levels determined in world capital markets. Labor is free to come and
g0, SO wage rate structures tend to a common level, like interflowing waters of the sea.
Product prices are set in world markets. Given those premises, all taxes are shifted to
land, the only factor fixed in an otherwise open economy. Tax jurisdictions are defined
as fixed areas of land.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

377

YJSE
36,4

378

3.9.2 A simple test for tax neutrality. Using the simple premises lets us devise a
simple test for tax neutrality[48]. Taxable surplus is what we can tax without driving
land into the wrong use. It is not enough that the land supply is fixed: a tax must not
force underuse or other misuse of the fixed supply. A neutral tax is one that does not
change the ranking of land uses in the eyes of the landowner. Treat net rent of land as a
residual. Calculate the ratio of after-tax rent to before-tax rent. If the ratio is simply
(1 — # (where tis a tax rate), the tax is neutral — the highest and best use of land after
tax is the same as that before tax. The ratio (1 — 4) is independent of any parameter the
landowner controls. The tax base on marginal land must be zero, lest the land be
sterilized.

The simplicity of the technique allows for complexity in the applications, without
losing any threads in tangles of detail. We may incorporate time and capital theory in
the model simply by shifting from “rent” to the DCF of land in perpetuity (DCFP). The
writer has done this elsewhere (Gaffney, 2006); the present exposition is limited to
giving a fragment of this work in Appendix 2.

In a free market, the function of rent is to sort and arrange land uses: landowners
allocate land to those uses yielding the most net product, or rent. This is socially
advantageous: the net product is the excess of revenue over all human costs, so land
yielding the highest rent is adding its utmost to the national product.

When we base our tax on the net product (or rent), the ranking of rival land uses
remains the same after-tax as it was before-tax. That is, if use “A” yields 20 percent
more rent than use “B”, and a tax takes 50 percent of the rent, then use A still yields the
owner 20 percent more after-tax than use B, and the owner still prefers use A. We will
see below that when we tax something other than rent (say the gross revenue, G), we
will drive the land into less intensive uses, or out of use altogether.

A related advantage of taxing rent is that we can often levy the tax on the land’s
potential to yield rent, regardless of what use the owner actually chooses. This is how
the property tax works, at most times de juve and at many times de facto. It is possible
because buyers and sellers trade land based on their estimates of its maximum
rent-yielding capability. The tax valuer observes and records these value data, and
uses them to place a value on all comparable lands. Many books and manuals and
professional journals have been published on the techniques used: it is a well
established art, with its own professional associations, of which one of my sources,
Ted Gwartney, is a leading member. (Gwartney is Director of Assessments, City of
Greenwich, Connecticut).

Such a tax is limited to the maximum possible rent, and so will not exceed a
landowner’s ability to pay, if she uses the land in one of the best uses. That does not
mean stark uniformity or monoculture, because as market forces lure many lands into
what looks like the single best use they create an equilibrium where each individual
landowner has several choices, if not blocked by zoning. For example, the presence of
many apartment houses in a neighborhood creates a need and demand for
complements like stores and restaurants and medical offices. The presence of many
peach growers in a farming region creates a surplus of labor during slack months,
promoting other crops with other peak seasons, as happened on the east side
of California’s Great Central Valley under the spur of land taxes used to finance
irrigation works. A tax on land value will not interfere with using land in one of the
best ways, but will discourage wasting or misusing or neglecting it by using it any
other way, e.g. by growing cotton at State and Madison in Chicago’s Loop.

3.9.3 Algebra of EBCOR, and a numerical example. We can raise output and jobs
and investment opportunities and tax revenues above their present levels, by removing
tax bias. This is the heart of the thesis. When we base a tax on taxable surplus, and
keep the tax proportional to taxable surplus, we levy taxes without changing the land
manager’s ranking of land uses, as noted earlier. On the other hand, if we tax on some
other basis (gross revenue, for example), we bias the owner against uses more heavily
taxed. To repeat, we assume here that the seller is a “price-taker,” meaning he sells on a
world market and cannot raise the price, or otherwise shift the tax, so has no choice but
to bear the tax.

Net revenue of land IS the Taxable Surplus: we cannot tax more than that without
aborting the land use. The ratio of costs (C) to gross revenue (G) varies over a wide
range, from zero up nearly to one (and even above one for subeconomic uses which,
however, we do not want). Let’s compare two rival uses, A and B, for the same piece of
land. Use “A” yields more net revenue (N), but has a higher ratio of C/G. We levy a tax
of 10 percent on gross revenue (G). To simplify, expenses and capital costs are
consolidated as “C”, so N = G — C. Table I shows the effects of the tax on net revenue
after tax (NAT).

Use A produces more goods, makes more jobs, and yields more net product: it is
clearly the higher use. The tax on G, however, turns A into a lower use than B, in the
eyes of the landowner or manager. A 10 percent tax on G is a 100 percent tax
on the NV from use A, wiping out the entire incentive to put land to use A. It is also a tax
on the N from use B, but only a 40 percent tax, leaving 60 percent of the Net Product for
the landowner. The landowner would choose use A in the absence of taxes, or with a
tax on N; but the tax on G forces him to choose use B, which is socially inferior. This, in
a nutshell, expresses the damage done by imposing taxes on bases other than N, the net
revenue of land. The tax lowers output, employment, and investment opportunities for
capital, all three. Fourth, it lowers tax revenues well below their maximum possible
level of $10,000, the net revenue from use A.

More generally, a tax on G is a tax on Nat a rate equal to G/N times the tax rate on
G. Algebraically:

NAT =N —- 1G = N(1 — tG/N) (5)

The ratio G/N is a multiplier on the impact of the tax rate, ¢.

For every parcel of land there are usually many alternative uses, and even more
alternative intensities of any given use, a whole spectrum of choices. Up and down the
spectrum, a tax on G systematically aborts the “higher” (more intensive) uses in favor
of lower uses. The effect is like a “scorched-earth” policy, but not one we inflict on the
invading enemy in wartime: we inflict it on ourselves in all times, war and peace, by
adopting a suppressive tax policy.

Land use G (Sk) C ($k) N (8k) G/N Tax ($k) NAT (Sk) Tax/N (%)

A 100 90 10 10 10 0 100
B 20 15 5 4 2 3 40

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

379

Table I.

Effect on net revenues of a
10 percent tax on gross
revenues

YJSE
36,4

380

If we tax C instead of G, we can illustrate the effects by another table like Table I, but
this is now a simple exercise that I leave to the reader. Here, the bias is in the same
direction — toward lower uses — but the tax as a fraction of N will now be the tax on C
multiplied times the coefficient C/N. To visualize this effect most simply, premise a
third land use, “D”, that yields some G without using any C at all - a parking lot is a
near-example. Use D would now be tax free, while uses A and B would still pay a tax
on gross revenue (G), and be displaced by use D (parking lots). Parking would be
ample, but there would be little there to park for.

There are many more possible tax types we might consider, taxes imposed on parts
of C, but not all. A payroll tax is an example. This tax would discourage the use of
labor on land, but not the use of capital, and so would have two biases: less labor use,
with the same capital use, or even more capital use as capital substitutes for labor.
It would be tedious to spell out here all the many such possible variations of tax policy.
The major point is that taxes on any base other than N, the Net Product of land, bias
the market against the best and fullest use of land.

Champions of taxing personal income used to push their case, years ago, with
reasoning parallel to what I have applied above to taxes based on “N’. It does not
change how people allocate their time or other resources, they said, because it does not
change the ranking of alternatives. However, the reasoning does not fit the personal
income tax. Take labor, for example. Most costs of creating new human beings and
equipping them with “human capital” are not deductible, or exempt from “consumer”
taxes. Human capital is not depreciable or expensible. It is the modern fashion to
snicker and scoff at people who say it should be, but US Supreme Court Justice
Brandeis pointed the way, 97 years ago:

[...] the expense of securing indemnity against [. . .] accident, sickness, invalidity, premature
death, superannuation, and unemployment, should be recognized as part of the daily cost of
living [. . .] So far as it is a necessary charge, it should be met now as a current expense; [. . .]
(Brandeis, 1911; Graham, 1971).

Personal labor supply is also highly elastic through migration — the “brain drain”
effect, for example. Personal and corporate income also include value-added by equity
capital, whose supply is highly elastic everywhere except in the unworldly Harberger
model or “new view” of the property tax.

3.9.4 The broader reach of a narrower tax base. “Less is More” when we banish
“broad-based taxes” in favor of the land tax base. When we focus taxes on the net
product, N, we can raise the tax rate with no ill effects on land use, but with good
effects instead. By contrast, we cannot raise taxes on G (gross revenue) very high
without catastrophe. A high rate will drive all land out of its best use, and some
land completely out of use, a ruinous outcome. To avoid the ruin we must lower the
tax rate, but that means we cannot collect in taxes all of the rent from land uses like
B, or much of any from uses like D. Thus, with taxes on G, we first abort some of
the taxable surplus, and still fail to collect all that remains. In Table I, the tax
collected is only $2,000, or 40 percent of the taxable surplus (\) from use B, and
only 20 percent of the potentially taxable surplus of $10,000 from use A. With taxes
on N, we can collect the entire taxable surplus from use A, $10,000, while aborting
none of it.

Naturally, the owners of superior resources realize this, and therefore devote their
efforts to persuading the public to support taxes on G and/or C, hurting their
marginal competitors while sparing themselves. This carries the double benefit of
stifling their competition while maximizing political demands. to hold down the tax
rates. Adam Smith missed a trick when he called landowners “indolent” for failing to
see their self-interest in lowering non-land taxes. Indolent they may have been and
be in many ways, but they have a self-interest in retaining tax bases whose rates
cannot be raised to the blue sky. Buchanan has made something like this a central
part of his anti-tax “public choice” philosophy. He writes that a tax with more excess
burden is better than one with less, because government, if allowed to tax in the less
burdensome way, may get more revenue, which he opposes (Buchanan, 1987). Here,
however, we are refuting the more common fear that public revenues will fall
too short.

With taxes on G, as opposed to N, there is the danger of a fatal Laffer-curve effect.
For example, in shifting from a property tax to a sales tax, and maintaining revenue
neutrality, it may be necessary to hike the sales tax rate again, and again, and again, as
its suppressive effects kick in and abort the tax base. This may help explain why the
California State sales tax, for example, has risen from its original 2 percent (1933) to 4.5
percent in 1977 to virtually 8 percent now (counting city and county add-ons), without
apparently abating the State’s fiscal poverty, while neighboring Oregon lives nicely
with no sales tax at all. So do New Hampshire, Alaska, Montana and Delaware,
the other states free of sales taxes, and the Province of Alberta.

That conclusion understates the matter a good deal, because the neo-classical type
model leaves out income effects, liquidity or cash-flow effects, and wealth effects.
A land tax is not simply neutral, it puts positive pressure on holdout and laggard
landowners by “dessicating” their liquidity and lowering their wealth and net incomes
if they do not put their land to its highest use. At the same time, it tends to raise the
creditworthiness of potential builders, and other land users, by raising their
incomes-after-tax. A full consideration of these matters is beyond the scope of the
present simple model, except to say they are probably as important, if not more
important, than what is encompassed in the simple approach of our model[49].

Some critics of the land tax policy allege that the land tax base is “too narrow,” and
cannot support the government. They seem to have it backwards. Table I, and the
reasoning behind it, tell us we can collect more by taxing land, and exempting G and C,
than in any other way. A real-world example that approximates the model might be the
enclave of Hong Kong, at least before 1997, where taxes on Gand C were very light,
and the public coffers overflowed with land revenues.

The present model suggests a much more severe excess burden than traditional
Chicago-style or “wedge effect” models. Those “wedge-effect” models deal only with
single uses of land, and do not allow for shifting to higher uses.

The simple model given omits the tax treatment of durable capital inputs, to keep
matters short and simple. The writer has modeled capital inputs elsewhere (Gaffney,
2006). In addition, Appendix 2 summarizes the model and its findings.

4. Group C. Uncapping the tax rate

4.1 Element No. 13 Freedom from the constraint of excess burden

4.1.1 Absence of taxable event. The property tax on land value ex buildings is based on
owning land, not on using, improving, buying, inheriting, bequeathing, or selling it.
There is no taxable event, hence no Laffer-curve Effect or Excess Burden Effect to cap

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

381

IJSE
36,4

382

feasible tax rates. A main exception is where the inhibitory effect is deliberate, as with
“green” taxes targeted either to ease crowding or to conserve exhaustible resources.
We have also shown how to restructure income taxation on land income to minimize its
excess burdens while tapping unrealized capital gains.

4.1.2 Raising the tax base by taxing it [sic]. Using the land tax to obviate other taxes
raises the tax base via three effects: the ATCOR Effect (Element No. 11); the EBCOR
Effect (Element No. 12); and fostering better allocation of land, the tax base, by the
cash-drain effect on dilatory owners of derelict land Gection 4.1.5). Better allocation
and use of the land base raises its taxable capacity, so the higher the tax rate, the
higher the base — a remarkable and counterintuitive finding.

There is even a fourth effect, a by-product and corollary of the third. This is
enriching and updating the assessor's data-base of market sales by speeding the
ownership turmover of land.

4.1.3 Cutting waste in government. Another effect is using taxes to finance public
works and services. On balance these raise land values by at least the amount of the
expenditure, but there are exceptions, some blatant. There is waste as legislators roll
logs and trade pork, misappropriating billions for subeconomic public works. They
avoid full-funding any works in order to authorize too many, stringing out
construction over years and decades, sticking the taxpayers with wasted interest all
the while.

However, a land-value tax contains a strong antidote to waste: it automatically
raises taxes on the major culprits. These are local landowners who expect to gain
unearned increments from and lobby for such waste. Modern academic and media
critics miss the mark when they make universal scapegoats of “bureaucrats” and
“politicians”. It is true that these are human beings with their own agendas, as
Buchanan and the Austrians say, but they paper over the larger truth: the scapegoats
are puppets for the underlying private interests that pay the pipers and call their tunes.

A social dividend is a possible expenditure that would raise the demand for land. It
is a lovely ideal, and implemented in small ways here and there. Even Renaissance
Florence had its monde delli doti, a fund to endow each newlywed couple with a dowry
from the fisc. However, first we should want to bail out extant underfunded quasi
social dividends like social security, welfare, medical care, public health, public
schools, libraries, parks, veterans’ benefits, and others now starved for funds.

4.1.4 “Tax capitalization” does not erode its base. The tax on land value does not
erode away its base. With a property tax on land value there is no taxable event to
avoid, as mentioned, hence no Laffer Effect. In addition, even with a tax on land
income, the land does not move away or diminish.

Some economists have mistaken “tax capitalization” for erosion of the tax base. To
make this point they leap in fancy to an extreme tax rate so high, and public services so
low, there is no land value remaining. This is assuming the tax money is all wasted
(as by invading a foreign nation and losing), so the taxes are what Marshall called
“onerous” and not “beneficial”.

Even under that extreme assumption, however, a higher tax rate on land value
never causes lower tax revenues. Few have carried this beyond cocktail party chatter,
but such banter often betrays underlying doubts that have simply not congealed
enough to be published. Murray Rothbard is one who has published the view that the
tax destroys its own base. “[. . .] the single tax would yield no revenue at all. For if rents
are zero, a 100 percent tax on rents will also yield nothing.” (Rothbard, 1997, p. 298).
This is simply bad algebra - very bad — as I will show.

“Tax capitalization” refers to the effect that a tax on land value has of lowering the
value of land, its own base. Let V, value of land; a, annual rent; i, interest rate; ¢ tax rate;
and 7, tax. Let “a” be unaffected by lowering other taxes or by improving public
services. Then:

V=(a-tV)fi (6)

Rothbard stops here. He notes that Vis a decreasing function of “?’, and then imagines
that a very high “f” means no V, and no yax.

Generations of appraisers and assessors have carried their algebra beyond where
Rothbard stopped, and avoided this fallacy. One simply collects terms, and then:

V=a/G+d (7)

Equation (7) is a simpler form of equation (1), above, with g = 0. The denominator on
the right side, (+ ), is the “cap rate” (capitalization rate), found in every appraisal
book and assessment manual. Adding “?” to “i” is called “tax capitalization”.

The tax (7) is ¢V:

T=WV=t/G4+)xa (8)

The effective tax rate on “a” is #/@ + 2). That ratio is always an increasing function of f,
approaching 100 percent asymptotically.

Note in passing, from equation (6), that the tax base, V, is the after-tax value of land.
This makes the real tax rate much lower than the apparent rate. To this extent,
Rothbard is on target. It is as though the personal income tax were based on after-tax
income, in which case a rate of 100 percent would take just 50 percent of income. So, to
tap the land base we need tax rates higher than are considered normal or possible
today, when buildings and fixtures and (in many states) inventories are part of the tax
base. This is, indeed, a major reason why landowners want to keep them part of the tax
base: not that they like paying taxes on buildings, but the landowners need arguments
for holding down property taxes.

4.1.5 Better allocation of land. The tax fosters better allocation of the tax base,
raising its taxable capacity. Untaxing production is the carrot that moves landowners;
taxing land is the corresponding stick,

The land tax imposes a kind of “negative excess burden”, that is a positive push to
use land better. The land-value tax is a fixed annual charge that stimulates owners to
seek the highest and best use of their land. For many wealthy and retired people,
landownership is just a place to park slack money where it will keep safely and grow
slowly without their bestirring themselves to manage or supervise it much. Turgot,
Smith, Mill, Walras, George, and others all observed this. Turgot noted landowners’
*dilatory” habits; Smith referred to the “indolence” of landowners whose easy life so
cosseted them that they could not perceive their own best interest; Mill said they “grew
rich in their sleep”. The cash drain of a regular land tax awakens them.

Clawson, observing the slack management of our National Forests, wrote we should
evaluate managers as though the forests carried a mortgage lien equal to their value.
Interest on that would be an annual charge; the measure of the managers’ performance

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

383

IJSE
36,4

384

would be profit above that deductible. That describes the situation of the landowner
subject to an annual tax based on land value. Tideman has written about the theory of
it (Tideman, 1999). Experience has shown this factor to be powerful. California’s
Inigation Districts when young and vibrant, 1909-1938, are a good case study.

The problem with many landholders is not indolence so much as aggressive
oligopolistic or cartel behavior. Major chain retailers acquire advance sites routinely in
the course of expanding; house-builders do so in the course of turning over finished
improved sites to customers; oil firms in the course of finding and extracting their
product. These land banks serve them not just for their own expansion but to block
competitors.

In the serious game of oligopoly, as in the child’s game of Parcheesi, a player will
often choose to set back a rival even at the expense of his own advancement. The
British Competition Commission has recently documented how widespread and
stifling these practices are in Britain (Her Majesty’s Government, Competition
Commission, n.d). Of course, parallel findings have been common over many years in
the USA. What is less common, sadly, is the modern pundit who sees this as the major
problem that it is, and sounds the alarm.

A tax based on the value of these land banks would shrink them routinely without
needing heroic investigative reporters to sound the alarms, and face the personal and
professional costs of offending powerful civic “leaders” and advertisers. It would also
be important to include in “land” the value of covenants against competition held by
some sellers as liens on the lands of buyers. Better yet would be to illegalize such
covenants as being in restraint of trade, but meantime we can tax them heavily,
perhaps into extinction.

In addition, “green” or Pigovian taxes open new horizons for improving resource
allocation by targeted use of inhibitory taxes. Some of these taxes, as noted in Elements
No. 5 and No. 7, offer huge revenue potentials. The writer has explored this subject
elsewhere (Gaffney, 1998a).

4.1.6 Capital formation and macro stimulation. The tax encourages both saving and
investing, leveling them upwards, the macro-economists’ dream. It raises both supply
and demand, satisfying both supply-side and demand-side economists.

4.1.7 Equity-cum-efficiency-cum-incentives. The ownership of the tax base is highly
concentrated, making the tax progressive in impact. One-third or more of Americans
do not even own their own dwelling places, hence pay no land tax. The tax burden is
not shifted, so the ultimate incidence is the same as the impact. This progressivity
minimizes the number of true hardship cases, and hence the cost of relieving them.
Ownership of wealth generally, and land and capital gains — mostly land gains — are
especially concentrated, much moreso than incomes from productive labor, and
increasingly so. Most of the poor have to work for taxable income, just to eat and
survive, so they do pay income and payroll and sales and excise taxes, but not
land taxes.

Thus, taxes based on land rents and values are progressive in their impact and
incidence, at the same time they are pro-incentive in their allocative effects, as well as
stimulating in their macro-economic effects. This combination of virtues is unique.
It belies the neo-classical cliché that policy-makers must always choose between equity
and efficiency in taxation. It makes it possible to raise tax rates to high levels without
either stifling good incentives or embracing regressivity. This greatly enhances the
revenue potential of such taxes[50]. .

It is widely alleged and believed that the property tax on housing, taken by itself, is
regressive with respect to income. The data, when reasonably analyzed with a
modicum of common sense and statistical sophistication, do not support this claim.
Rather, they show the reverse. The writer has published his data and proofs elsewhere
(Gaffney, 1972, 1993b, 2008a).

4.1.8 Local multiplier effect. The tax hits absentee owners of land, without
discouraging the inflow of capital. There is a strong local multiplier effect from this
(Element No. 16).

The sum of the eight items 4.1.1 to 4.1.8 above is that to focus taxes on land, and
sunset other taxes, is to raise the feasible tax rate almost “to the blue sky”. I say
“almost” because when we get into uncharted territory there will be surprises, and new
problems of measurement, moral hazard, agency, administration, and adjustment.
The writer has anticipated some of them, but we must allow for the contingency that
there will be others (Gaffney, 1991c).

The “blue sky” conclusion applies to taxes on the value of space and location. When
it comes to user charges for extracting exhaustible resources, and green taxes to
control crowding and pollution, we are back to tradeoffs, balancing costs and benefits
in the old neo-classical way, aiming for optimal rather than maximal rates. In part 3.2.4
of Element No. 7 I have suggested how, in many cases, we can combine fixed with
variable taxes to solve such trade-off problems and still impose high tax rates,

4.2 Element No. 14 The unseen reservoir of hugh internal valuations and holdout prices
4.2.1 High internal valuations. Observed land markets understate the value of land to
most landowners. These owners’ internal valuations are above the observed market:
that is why they do not offer to sell. In commodity markets annual ownership turnover
is 100 percent or more, as new goods flow through and are consumed. These markets
give a true idea of value. In land markets, on the other hand, there is no real turnover
(production and consumption), and ownership turnover is 5 percent or less. That is
5 percent of the parcels, and less of the total value, since smaller parcels turn over
faster. Assessors take that tiny sample to estimate the value of the whole. The other
95 percent of landowners in effect “sell” or “rent” to themselves each year, at values not
recorded.

How well does the 5 percent turnover represent the entire invisible “market” for
land? Not well: the active market is below the holdout market. Many owners routinely
declare “this land is not for sale, get away from my door,” or “I will not sell for any
price.” Some take it as a matter of pride. “T will never sell!” vowed Mahlon Vail, heir of
the 87,000 acre Vail Ranch in Riverside County, in 1956. Vail added, “At least I won't
sell until taxes get me.” It was just the “western branch” of Vail’s Empire Land and
Cattle Co., Arizona. In 1964, taxes did get him and he did sell: Vail Ranch became the
present cities of Temecula and Murrieta, housing over 100,000 people
(The Press-Enterprise, 2004). If Proposition 13 had passed before 1956 Vail might,
indeed, never have sold.

4.2.2 Tricks with “Contingent valuation”. Modern environmental economics has
spawned the discipline of “contingent valuation” to appraise damages to resources that
seldom pass through markets. It turns out there is a major difference between

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

385

5.1 Element No. 15 Mortgage interest as land rent

The hidden

Let us begin with municipal bonds (munis). When a government borrows on the taxable capacity

security of land revenues, it is in effect selling those revenues to the borrower.
The bondholder becomes a landowner, and could be taxed as such. Today such
bondholders pay neither property tax nor income tax. If the municipality sold lands
instead of borrowing on revenues therefrom, the buyer would be subject to taxes.
It would seem equitable, then, to tax municipal bonds as property, and their income as
income.

A private mortgage is like a public one, it is a de Jacto sale of rents to the lender.
“Intangible” paper assets are said to be too concealable to tax, but this kind of paper is
systematically recorded at the county level: mortgages, or deeds of trust, are of public
record. It is administratively feasible and enforceable, therefore, to put these into the
property tax base, as UCLA Law Professor Don Hagman, before his tragic death, kept
urging.

Their interest could also be put in the income-tax base. The doctrine of separation of
powers is used to keep them out, but that need not be hard and fast. After all, the same
doctrine kept salaries of municipal workers tax free until 1940 or so, when suddenly
they became taxable. “Separation of powers” antedated the income tax, and one might
challenge its application thereto. It would make an interesting case, as the lawyers say,
and it is outside this writer’s expertise.

So it may be possible, but is it desirable? A tax on mortgages would be mostly
shifted to borrowers in the form of higher interest rates, the supply of mortgage funds
being highly elastic. Thus, to tax mortgages is indirectly to tax real estate.

Holders of existing mortgages would suffer, but phasing-in is possible. Someone
suffers with any change of tax or other public policy, there are always winners and
losers. It is a risk all investors take knowingly.

But, would new lending be discouraged? Yes, at the margins. The most sensitive
margin is one which most people would not perceive at first, that is the margin of
durability or longevity. The more deferred the benefit of an investment, the more
interest-sensitive is its present value. However, is that bad? We are conditioned to
answer “yes,” but as an economist, I doubt it. More funds would be released for other
kinds of loans, shorter-term loans, causing higher turnover both of loans, and the
nation’s capital stock. Both can be shown to have positive macro-economic effects
(Gaffney, 2003).

Most beneficial would be the effect on stability of lending institutions. In 1988 we

were looking at a $50 billion bailout of S&Ls which failed by lending on real estate.
Many commercial banks were deep in the same mire. In 2008, nothing wiser for the
chastening of 1988, we face the “sub-prime” meltdown. It may be time to revive the old
“commercial loan” theories of banking, with their emphasis on liquidity and quality of
credit, achieved mainly by sticking to self-liquidating short-term commercial loans,
and avoiding long and speculative loans secured by real estate. It isa subject too big to
open here, but we will find plenty of support in the history and theory of banking for
keeping lenders out of mortgages.

It is widely assumed that cheap long-term credit is essential to let most people buy
real estate. Unfortunately that reasoning overlooks the nature of land values, which
makes it circular. The main effect of long-term loans has been to inflate land prices,

of land

387

IJSE
36,4

388

creating the very problem it offsets. It is a treadmill effect, a positive feedback loop like
overspraying pesticides.

Another benefit of including mortgages in the property tax base is to counter the
argument that the property tax discriminates against equity holders of real estate.
Many have questioned the equity of focusing taxes on the person with 5 percent equity
ina parcel, while exempting his bank. The California Constitution of 1879, at a peak of
populist fervor, contained a provision to tax mortgagees and limit landowners’ liability
to the equity. It has since disappeared without a trace, but it shows what is possible.

5.2 Element No. 16 Improving our balance of payments: the multipher effect of taxing
absentee owners

A high percentage of real property is owned from out of the state, and even the country.
The public dialogue is curiously silent on the point. California’s Legislative Analyst,
William Hamm, estimated in 1978 that absentees own over half of the value of taxable
property in California. This is a bold, bare, enormous fact, but few paid much attention.
Many Californians vote in the delusion that the property tax falls mainly on their
homes, so they passed Proposition 13 in 1978, shifting taxes off all this foreign wealth
and onto their own consumption and personal income and most small businesses that
rent their premises.

Voters are also swayed by the argument that they need to hold and attract capital.
That was relevant to Proposition 13, which lowered property taxes on capital as well as
land; but it carries no weight when considering a tax on pure land value, ex improvements.

There is another kind of local multiplier gain from raising state or local property
taxes, under current law. Net federal income tax payments fall because property taxes
are deductible, while sales and nuisance taxes that we raise to replace lost property
taxes are not deductible. Sales of local GO bonds (liens on property) stop. Cities use
revenue bonds instead, with higher interest rates. Fire insurance rates must rise as fire
departments shrivel. And private spending substituted for public spending has a
higher propensity to import. Public spending goes for policemen, firemen, teachers,
local contractors, and so on; much private spending goes out of state and keeps the
UPS trucks busy helping local customers avoid the sales taxes raised high to replace
property taxes. This substantial leakage of economic base results in multiple declines
in state income.

Absentees are not just Japanese banks and English dukes. Corporate-held property
comprises much of the real estate tax base. If California’s share of the stockholders
equals California’s share of the national population, then 85 percent of corporate
property is absentee-owned. The percentage may be lower, but it also may be higher
because many shareholders are aliens like the Sheiks of Araby.

Transferring rents from absentee owners to our fisc, spending the proceeds locally,
improves the state economic base and balance of payments. Convention says we must
not tax absentees, because they bring needed capital into our state, but that is
misdirected when we discuss taxing land ex capital. Absentees cannot remove space
and location, the source of most land values. They can remove exhaustible resources
by extracting them, but at this point a severance tax can reap the rent for the fisc.

A democratic sovereign state reports to the resident voters, not to absentees who
stand between the resident and the resources of her homeland. Absentees generally
worsen the quality of life when they displace local owners and turn local people into
tenants and migratory workers. Chauvinism and localism can be ugly, it is true. When
it comes to discriminating against immigrant workers, xenophobia fills the air, even
when the immigrants are stricken Americans like the droughted Okies that Steinbeck
dramatized. Taxing alien property pushes a different button; materialists welcome rich
aliens et dona ferentes. Yet, here is one instance where localism may be harnessed to
help create a healthier society.

Offshore oil and gas is outside state sovereignty and escapes all state and local
taxation. One result is unbalanced state hostility to offshore leasing, for the locals
suffer the degradation without sharing the gains. Some provision for state sharing in
offshore revenues seems indicated.

6. Summary and conclusion

Previous estimates of rent and land values have been narrowly limited to a fraction of
the whole, thus giving a false impression that the tax capacity is low. We are adding
14 Elements to the traditional narrow “single tax” base, plus two moot elements that
we advance for future consideration. These 16 Elements come in four Groups.

6.1 Group A: How conventional data sources hide land values

Element No. 1: Correcting omissions and understatements in commonly used data
: sources. ;

Element No. 2: Updating ancient sources that use obsolete low values.
Element No. 3: Raising the land fraction of real estate values.

Element No. 4: Farmland.

6.2 Group B: Broadening the meaning of land and its rent

Element No. 5: Adding rents that are best taxed by use of variable excises.
Element No. 6: Adding rents taxable by income taxes.
Element No. 7: Taxing for conservation, in lieu of subsidizing.
Element No. 8: Novel, unseen, and unobserved lands.
Element No. 9: Novel tenures now untaxed.

Element No. 10: Rents now dissipated by correctable policy.

Element No. 11: Rent gains from banning most existing taxes.

Element No. 12: Rent gains from removing excess burdens.

6.3 Group C: Uncapping the tax rate
Element No. 13: New freedom to raise tax rates.

Element No. 14: Reservoir of high internal valuations.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

389

IJSE
36,4

390

6.4 Group D: Moot new elements of taxable rent
Element No. 15: Mortgage interest as rent.
Element No. 16: Balance of payments multiplier.

Any one of those 16 elements indicates a much higher land tax base than economists
commonly recognize today. Taken together, they are overwhelming, and cast an
entirely new light on this subject.

Notes

1. Governor Jay Hammond, a Republican, set up the Alaska program. Alaska Senators
Stephens and Murkowski, along with other Republicans, pushed the Alaska model for Iraq.
Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton touted a national social dividend for the USA, keeping
the issue alive but also drawing the fire of partisan politics which is outside the scope of this
paper. The point is that both major parties show a sustained interest.

2. A notable exception was John Nagy, activist reformer with the Homeowners’ League of San
Diego, an offshoot of the Henry George School of San Diego, in the 1970s. Ted Gwartney, a
professional assessor and appraiser, came out of the San Diego School tradition and has
reformed assessments in several cities and the whole Province of British Columbia over a
long career. He is currently Director of Assessments in Greenwich, CT.

McLean, in an otherwise good chapter, has pulled his own teeth by expressing and halfway

endorsing that fear (McLean, 2005).

. For more on this topic see Gaffney (2007b).

. The Empire State Building is at 34th Street; the 100 percent location is at 57th.

. The map is published in Clark (1965).

. This seemingly obvious relationship is missing from the encyclopedic and “definitive”
works issued from Resources for the Future, Inc., which have undergirded an unwarranted
resource optimism for the last 50 years.

8. The Lincoln family behind the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy has long been invested in the
Cyprus-Bagdad Copper Corporation, a Delaware corporation, now merged into
Phelps-Dodge, with open pit mines in Yavapai County, Arizona. The corporation also
owns the town of Bagdad. Said Institute, which might do so much to fill this vacuum, has
never done so.

9. Some US Census data lower this average by counting any tiny “establishment” as a “farm” if

it sells $1,000 or more farm products a year, or could, or normally does. Farm economists do

not take this definition seriously, but focus on the much smaller number of much bigger

“commercial” farmers who make, or could make, a living from farming. The Census

definition has the effect, intended or not, of making casual readers think the typical farm is

much smaller than it really is.

10. TIME, July 25 1955.
11. “Land use changes,” 1997; Gaffney (1997), Fulton (1996).

12. “I think that I shall never see, a billboard lovely as a tree. But now unless the billboards fall,
Y’ll never see a tree at all”. - Ogden Nash.

13. Gaffney (1994, p. 36) and Jorgensen (1925, pp. 8-9). They were a sub-bioc in the larger bloc of
50 Populist Congressmen elected in 1894.

14. Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan and Trust Co. (1894), 157 US 429.
15. The USSC upheld the tax and its legal rationale in Flint v. Stone Tracy Co. (1911) 220 US 107.

w

NOP
16.
17.

18.

19,

20.

21.
22.

23.

25.

26.

27.
28.

30.

A good source on this is Brownlee (1986).

Going further back in history it is of interest that a social dividend is not a new concept. The
city-state of Florence, a pioneering capitalist and banking polity, used a catasto or property
tax to finance its monte delli doti, a form of social dividend distributed to each newly married
couple. At the same time it also raised money to defend itself against a larger neighbor,
Milan. The leader in introducing the catesto was Giovanni de Bicci de’ Medici, founder of the
banking family. 40 percent of the base of the catasfo was real estate other than housing,
which was exempt (Young, 1930, p. 34; Veseth, 1990, p. 43).

The ITC was Heller’s favorite idea, because he saw how easily fast write-off could be twisted,
as it has been, to allow repeated write-offs of old buildings, and of land. This information is
from Professor Heller, Jr of U.C. San Diego.

Phillips (2008). It was actually a President who did this, to camouflage a lag in national
income, but economists have been complicit.

Other champions, to their credit, are A. Auerbach, E. Sunley, Jr, J. Minarik, and J. Stiglitz
(Vickrey et al, 1992).

For more general models (V ickrey, 1971; Gaffney, 2006, 2008b).
In case it should become an issue, note that taxing gV does not lower either g or a. These are
both before-tax values, independent of the tax rate on land.

McBride (1924). On the difference between “property” and a “permit” see also US v. Fuller
(1973), 409 US 488, 93 S.Ct. 801 and Public Lands Council v. Babbitt, 120 S.Ct. 1815 (2000).

. Gaffney (1982a). Professor Albert Church invited me to submit this paper for a special issue

of the Natural Resources Journal, which I did. Meantime there had been a tectonic shift in the
power structure at the journal, and the new editors gave the paper to an industry spokesman
who reviewed it savagely and returned it. That’s the kind of thing that was happening in the
academic world in that era. ‘

A comparable privilege is enjoyed by orchardists who write off their early thinnings as
abandonments and thus take off three-fourths of the capital cost before a grove is even
mature. One writes off the abandoned trees pro rata, but as the others grow into the space
thus opened, no offsetting appreciation is recognized. In both cases this ranks as an
extraordinary privilege, open to few.

To be sure, Section 1231 assets enjoy a small taste of the same advantage: they, too, get
capital gains when they rise, and unlimited ordinary loss deduction. But the restrictions are
much tighter. The class of assets excludes inventories held for sale to customers (cil deposits
are certainly that). Gain and loss are recognized on a net basis only, not a gross basis. The

net basis means that to take an ordinary loss, you must first report all your gains as ordinary

income-quite a difference. And excess depreciation is recaptured.
The source, from an association of small oi! firms, is rather fugitive.

A researcher might begin with Appalachian Landownership Task Force (1983), Fair Tax
Coalition (1982), MACED (1999), Horton (1993) and Horton(n.d). It was noted that one coal
company that made $100 million in profit did not pay enough taxes to purchase a school bus;
Gaventa (1982). Gaventa and Lewis (1991).

. Cynics will deride or berate the cross-purpose of subsidizing an industry with one program

while cutting the numbers of fishermen with IF Q programs. This kind of cross-purpose is, of
course, found in other public programs. Critics blame “bureaucracy”, a handy all-purpose
scapegoat; but the point of consistency is usually to push up land prices. Recall, too, that the
imputed income from yachts and their moorings is tax free.

The low cap rate allows for general inflation, and future growth of the rent. One could justify
greater such allowances, which would lower the cap rate and raise the present value.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

391

IJSE
36,4

392

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

37.

38.

39.

40.
Al.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

Data from The Wisconsin Taxpayer, February 2003.

It is not really so plain or simple: law schools give courses on its nuances and complexities,
which are not covered here.

By the same logic, intrusive ATVs, snowmobiles, and vehicles like the Harley hog designed
deliberately to make maximal noise should bear heavy taxes, if not outright prohibition.
For an extended analysis see Gaffney (1997), module on “Entitlements, the Public Trust
Doctrine, and Allocation”.

Timidly, they proposed this only for the benefit of other landowners who got less favorable
zoning, the “wipeouts”. Today, “property rights” lobbies are demanding compensation for
the wipeouts, leaving the windfalls to landowners.

. In doing so the tax authority should take care not to have the zoning classified as “property”,

which would endow it with additional protections. I leave this tricky matter to a sympathetic
lawyer.

The sanctity of grandfathering is ironic, because the original grandfather cases, in MD and
OK, from which the concept got its name, were thrown out as unconstitutional. These were
laws that allowed only those blacks to vote who could prove that their grandfathers (or other
ancestors) had voted.

“farmers or cities first divert and use water by crude systems. Conservation measures
often are delayed until the pinch is on.” (Patterson, 1991). In 1962, The Orange County Water
District sued every upstream diverter on the Santa Ana. In the 1969 judgement, “each water
agency’s allotment is based on historical use.” (Patterson, 1991).

U’Ren was the father of the “Oregon System” of Initiative, Recall, and Referendum, a system
he pushed to further his ultimate aim of moving Oregon to the single tax. He succeeded in the
former, making him a great power in Oregon and even national politics. He failed to boost the
latter quite over the top, but by making the effort he won many concessions like making tax
assessors put higher taxable values on land.

3-14-24 report of the (Clarence) Stein Committee, cited in Pleydell and Wood (1960).

BW 6 March 95. David Card and Alan B. Krueger say otherwise. Becker cites studies saying
it is so, by Donald Deere and Finis Welch, TX A&M; Kevin Murphy, U of Chicago. Papers at
Jan AEA mtgs.

George recognized this, although he had his own clumsy indirect way of expressing it. He did

not regard consumer capital as being “really” capital, but he did observe people living on it
while they produced other capital.

Seligman (1895, Chapater. III, §4) repeated through 10 edn.
These works are cited in Gaffney (1972).

Musgrave et al. (1951). For a list of others see Netzer (1966, pp. 247 ff), and the Netzer book
itself, Chapter III.

For extended documentation of Clark’s vendetta against George, see Gaffney (1994a,
pp. 47-59)

For Marshall’s endorsement see Gaffney (2004a, last 4 paragraphs).

Some analysts prefer to treat rates of return after tax (RORAT) as the residual, and the
criterion of neutrality. Others object to that approach, with doctrinaire fervor. We do not
enter that thicket here. For those preferring the RORAT approach, the writer has run such a

test elsewhere (Gaffney, 1967a, b, c). The results were broadly consistent with those
presented here.

For more on the point see Gaffney (1967), available at: www.masongatfney.org
50. That is, if one believes, and the voters believe, that taxation should be progressive, and/or
responsive to the voters. It meets opposition from critics like Jon Coupal, leader of the
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers’ Association, who favors limiting the franchise to landowners, and
opposes majority rule because “you are essentially allowing those who don’t own property to
levy taxes on those who do.” Coupal (2003). Shades of Hamilton, Madison, and the Federalist
Papers!

51. For a literature survey see Gaffney (1997).

52. Adding to the deception, tax rates are often expressed in mills. Thus, a tax rate of 50 mills is
fodder for scary oratory, but it means 5 percent, and if that is applied to a base valued at 20
percent of market, 50 mills means 1 percent.

53. In 1977-1979 this writer held a vacant lot in Riverside, CA, that sold for about 40 times its
assessed value — property taxes were derisory, except to the escrow agent who made a great
show of apportioning them to the penny between buyer and seller, and charged more for this
service than the taxes themselves.

54. Ted Gwartney, then a Professional Appraiser for the Bank of America in Riverside, CA, and
now Assessor of Greenwich, CT, researched this datum.

55. For more on this topic see Gaffney (2007b).
56. Thanks to Jonathan Rowe for alerting me to this, when I thought I knew more than he did.

57. SP, which once owned 5 percent of California, has now spun off some of its lands into
the Catellus Company, a complex and underreported transaction we do not try to
unravel here.

References

Aaheim, A. and Nyborg, K. (1995), “On the interpretation and applicability of a ‘Green National
Product.”, The Review of Income and Wealth, Vol. 1 No. 41, pp. 57-72.

Aaron, H. and Galper, H. (1985), Assessing Tax Reform, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

Andelson, R.V. and Gaffney, M. (1979), “Seligman and his critique from social utility”,
in Andelson, R.V. (Ed), Critics of Henry George, Fairleigh-Dickinson University Press,
Rutherford, NJ, pp. 273-92.

Appalachian Landownership Task Force (1983), Who Owns Appalachia?, University Press of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

Arax, M. (2003), “Massive farm owned by L.A. man”, LA Times, December 19.

Barnes, P. (2001), Who Owns the Skye, Island Press, Covelo, CA, p. 150, and several sequels.
Becker, G. (1995), cited in Business Week, March 6.

Bradsher, K. (1987), “Interview with A. Kahn”, LA Times, Part IV, November 22, p. 3.

Brandeis, L.D. (1911), “Workingmen’s insurance — the road to social efficiency”, Proceedings of
the National Conference of Charities and Corrections, Ft Wayne Printing Co., Ft Wayne,
IN, pp. 156-62.

Brownlee, E. (1985), “Wilson and financing the modern state: the revenue act of 1916”,
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 129 No. 2, pp. 173-210.

Buchanan, J. (1987), “Constitutional economics”, in Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (Eds), The New
Palgrave, A Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 1, Macmillan, London, pp. 585-8.

Buckley, M. (1998), “How IFQs change fishermen’s business strategies”, Pacific Fishing,
February, pp. 31-2.

Calabrese, M. and Snider, J.H. (2003), “Up in the air”, The Atlantic Monthly, September.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

393

YJSE
36,4

394

California Revenue and Tax Code (n.d), §434.5 (Mandates low assessment of land classified as
“timberland” for local property taxation).

California State Constitution, Section 10, Article 13 (preferential underassessment of private golf
courses).

Carter Report (1966), Royal Commission on Taxation, Ottawa.
Cheung, S.N.S. (1969), Theory of Share Tenancy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Clark, C. (1965), “Land taxation: lessons from international experience”, in Hall, P. (Ed.), Land
Values, Sweet & Maxwell, London.

Clawson, M. (1976a), “The national forests”, Science, Vol. 191, February 20, pp. 762-7.

Clawson, M. (1976b), The Economics of National Forest Management, Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, MD.

Commons, J.R. (1961), “Institutional economics”, Vol. II (first published by The Macmillan
Company 1934), University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI, p. 819.

Costanza, R., D’Arge, R., De Groot, R., Farberk, S., Grasso, M., Hannon, B., Limburg, K., Naeem, S.,
O'Neill, R,, Paruelo, J., Raskin, R., Sutton, P. and van den Belt, M. (1997), “The value of the
world’s ecosystem services and natural capital”, Nature, Vol. 387, pp. 253-60.

Cowan, B. (1958), A Graphic Summary of Municipal Improvement and Finance, International
Research Commission on Real Estate Taxation, Harper & Brothers, New York, NY.

Dacy, D.C. (1962), “Prices and productivity in the construction industry”, PhD dissertation,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, also cited in House and Home, May 1963, p. 11, and
in “Productivity and price trends in construction since 1947,” Review of Economics and
Statistics (1965), pp. 406-11.

Daniels, T. (1998), When City and Country Collide, Island Press, New York, NY, p. 212.

Daugherty, A. (1955), Major Land Uses in the US, Ag. Ec. Rpt. #723, ERS, USDA, September,
1995.

Douglas, E. (2007), “A frigid isle to show LA ways to tap Earth’s furnace”, LA Times, October 12,
p. 1.
Fair Tax Coalition (1982), Struggling for Tax Justice in the Mountains, Lovely, KY.

Gaffney, M. (1957), Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber and Other Assets, Agricultural
Information Series #62, N.C. State College, Raleigh, NC, reprint 1960.

Gaffney, M. (1962), “Land and rent in welfare economics”, in Clawson, M., Harriss, M. and
Ackerman, J. (Eds), Land Economics Research, The Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD, pp. 141-67.

Gaffney, M. (1964), “Containment policies for urban sprawl”, in Stauber, R. (Ed.), Approaches to
the Study of Urbanization. Governmental Research Center, The University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS, pp. 115-33. (Book is distributed by The State Printer, Topeka, KS, rather
than the University which published it.) Reprints of “Containment Policies” distributed by
The Brookings Instn, and The Robert Schalkenbach Fdtn, both now out of stock.
Republished in Compact Cities: A Neglected Way of Conserving Energy, Joint Hearings,
Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs; and Committee on Interstate. and
Foreign Commerce, US House of Representatives, 96th Congress Ist Sess. Washington:
USGPO, 1980, pp. 283-312 (Congressman Henry Reuss). Republished in The Congressional
Record, March 16, 1972 (Congressman Les Aspin).

Gaffney, M. (1967a), “Tax-induced slow turnover of capital” (unabridged version in AJES, 1968),
Western Economic Journal, September, pp. 308-23.
Gaffney, M. (Ed.) (1967b), Extractive Resources and Taxation, University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison, WI.

Gaffney, M. (1967c), ““Editor’s conclusion”, Extractive Resources and Taxation, University of
Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Gaffney, M. (1969), “Coordinating tax incentives and public policy: the treatment of land income”,
in Schultze, C.L., The Role of Incentives in Public Policy, available at: www.masongaffney.org

Gaffney, M. (1970a), “Adequacy of land as a tax base”, in Holland, D. (Ed.), The Assessment of
Land Value, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Gaffney, M. (1970b), “Tax treatment of land income”, Economic Analysis and the Efficiency of
Government, Hearings, US Congress, Jomt Economic Committee, Subcommittee on
Efficiency in Government, Part 2, USGPO, Washington, DC, pp. 405-15.

Gaffney, M. (1972), “The property tax is a progressive tax”, Proceedings, NTA, 64th Annual
Conference, Kansas City, MO, USA, 1971, pp. 408-26, republished in The Congressional
Record, March 16, 1972, pp. E 2675-79 (Congr. Les Aspin.) republished in Local Taxation
(abridged), January 1972. Republished by Resources for the Future Inc., The Property Tax
is a Progressive Tax, Reprint No. 104, October 1972.

Gaffney, M. (1976), “Foreign investment in US land”, in Wunderlich, G. (Ed.), Foreign Investment
in US Real Estate, Ec. Research Service, USDA, pp. 147-63.

Gaffney, M. (1977a), Ox! and Gas Leasing Policy: Alternative for Alaska in 1977, Alaska State
Legislature, Juneau, AK, p. 31.

Gaffney, M. (1977b), “Greater social benefits from our national forests”, address to Western
Timber Association, March 4, reproduced by Western Timber Association, San Francisco,
CA, pp. 1-20.

Gaffney, M. (1980), “Alternative ways of taxing forests”, in Knedlik, W. (Ed.), State Taxation of
Forest & Land Resources: Symposium Proceedings, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy,
Cambridge, MA.

Gaffney, M. (1982a), “Oil and gas: the unfinished tax reform”, paper presented at 20th Annual
Conference of TRED, The Committee on Taxation, Resources and Economic Development,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 1-54.

Gaffney, M. (1982b), “Why I recommend a ‘No’ vote on S.B. 200, for a peripheral canal”, Report to
the Council, City of Riverside, in My Capacity as Commissioner of Public Utilities.

Gaffney, M. (1985), “Why research farm land ownership and values”, in Majchrowitz, T.A. and
Almy, R.R. (Eds), Property Tax Assessment, USDA, International Assocation of Assessing
Officers, and The Farm Foundation, Chicago, IL, pp. 91-109.

Gaffney, M. (1988), “Nonpoint pollution: tractable solutions to intractable problems”,
in Novotny, V. (Ed.), Nonpoint Pollution, Marquette University Press, Milwaukee, WI, p. 12.

Gaffney, M. (1988/89), “Non-point pollution”, Journal of Business Administration, Vol. 18 No. 1&2,
Special Issue: Future Directions for Economics, pp. 133-54.

Gaffney, M. (1991a), “Land-value gains.and the capital gains tax”, unpublished, expanding
on 1970.

Gaffney, M. (1991b), “The partiality of indexing capital gains”, Proceedings of the 83rd Annual
Conference (1990) on Taxation, NTA-TIA, Columbus, OH, pp. 49-53.

Gaffney, M. (1991c), “Rent, interest, tax rates, and land prices”, paper presented at The 19th
Biennial World Conference, International Union, Session on “Fiscal Policy and the Theory
of Rent,”, King’s College, London, 23 March, pp. 1-11 + Appendices.

Gaffney, M. (1992a), “The taxable surplus in water resources”, Contemporary Policy Issues,
Vol. 10 No. 4, pp. 74-82.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

395

IJSE
36,4

396

Gaffney, M. (1992b), “Rising concentration and falling property tax rates”, in Wunderlich, G. (Ed.),
Land Ownership and Taxation in American Agriculture, Westview Press, Boulder, CO,
pp. 119-37, Offprints distributed by The Robert Schalkenbach Foundation.

Gaffney, M. (1993a), “Whose water? Ours”, in Dyer, P. (Ed.), Whose Water? Past; Present; Future.
Seattle: Institute for Environmental Studies, University of Washington, Washington, DC,
pp. 69-93, 125-33.

Gaffney, M. (1993b), “The taxable capacity of land”, in Salkin, P. (Ed.), Land Value Taxation,
Conference Sponsored by The Government Law Center of Albany Law School, The Senate
Environmental Conservation Committee, and the New York State Division of Equalization
and Assessment, The Government Law Center, Albany, NY, pp. 59-82. Also Proceedings,
with court-reported discussion, that the Government Law Center of Albany Law School
published separately: Land Value Taxation, pp. 60-74.

Gaffney, M. (1994a), “Neo-classical economics as a stratagem against Henry George”, in Gaffney, M.
and Harrison, F. (Eds), The Corruption of Economics, Shepheard-Walwyn, London.

Gaffney, M. (1994b), “Land as a distinctive factor of production”, in Tideman, N. (Ed.), Land and
Taxation, Shepheard-Walwyn, London, pp. 39-102.

Gaffney, M. (1995), “Token taxation of timber and timberland in California: a module from

‘Property tax reform in the big picture”, paper presented at the Conference on Land,
Wealth, and Poverty, The Jerome Levy Institute.

Gaffney, M. (1997), “What price water marketing? California’s new frontier”, American Journal of
Economics and Sociology, Vol. 56 No. 4, pp. 475-520.

Gaffney, M. (1998a), “Red-light taxes and green-light taxes”, in Robertson, J. (Ed.), Shaving Our
Common Heritage: Resource Taxes and Green Dividends, Oxford Centre for the
Environment, Ethics and Society (OCEES), Mansfield College, Oxford, pp. 30-6.

Gaffney, M. (1998b), “Taxation of mobile capital in a global free market — opportunities and
threats for low tax countries”, Offshore Investment, No. 90, pp. 40-4.

Gaffney, M. (2003), “Taxes, capital, and jobs”, Geophilos, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 62-74.

Gaffney, M. (2004), “A Cannan hits the mark”, in Andelson, R.V. (Ed.), Crities of Henry George,
rev. ed, Vol. II, pp. 435-50.

Gaffney, M. (2006), “A simple general test for tax bias”, AJES, Vol. 65 No. 3, pp. 733-49.
Gaffney, M. (2007), New Life in Old Cities, The Robert Schalkenbach Foundation, New York, NY.

Gaffney, M. (2008a), “Housing, income, and the progressivity of taxing property”, Groundswell,
May/June.

Gaffney, M. (2008b), “Keeping land in capital theory: Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and
George”, AJES, Vol. 67, January, pp. 119-41, paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
History of Economics Society (HES), Grinnell College, June 25, 2006; Revised, July 2006, for
publication in the AJES, 2008.

Garnaut, R. and Anthony, C.-R. (1977), “A new tax for natural resources projects”, in Thomson, A.
and Crommelin, M. (Eds), Mineral Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy, University of
British Columbia Press, Vancouver.

Gaventa, J. (1982), Power and Powerlessness: Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appalacuan Valley,
University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL.

Gaventa, J. and Lewis, H. (1991), Participatory Education and Grassroots Development: The Case

of Rural Appalachia (Gatekeeper Series No. SA25), International Institute for Environment
and Development, London.

George, H. (1879), Progress and Poverty, Robert Schalkenback Foundation, New York, NY,
pp. 248-9.
Getty Oil Company (1980), Annual Report, Tulsa, OK, pp. 62-5.

Gleason, V.E. (1977), “Los Angeles v. San Fernando: Ground Water Management in the Grand
Tradition”, 4 Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly 703, 709.

Goldsmith, R. (1955), A Study of Savings in the US, Vol. 3, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, p. 12.

Goldsmith, R. (1962), The National Wealth of the United States in the Postwar Period, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 186, 234, 238.

Gordon, RJ. (1968), “A new view of real investment in structures 1919-1966”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 50 No. 4, pp. 417, 428.

Graedel, T., Mtiller, D.B., Wang, T. and Duval, B. (2006), “Exploring the engine of anthropogenic
iron cycles”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, January 17, Vol. 103 No. 44,
pp. 16111-16.

Graham, O.L. Jr (1971), The Great Campaigns: Reform and War in America, 1900-1928,
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ (reprint).

Griffenhagen-Kroeger, Inc. (1962), “The effects of tax exemption for improvements and/or
personality”, pp. 25-40, mimeographed (San Francisco): Assembly Interim Subcommittee
on Tax Exemption, California Legislature, November.

Hagman, D. and Misczynski, D. (1976), “Windfalls for wipeouts”, American Society of Planning
Officials, Chicago, IL.

Haig, R.M. (1915), Exemption of Improvements from Taxation in Western Canada, for the
Committee on Taxation of the City of New York, M.B. Brown, New York, NY.

Her Majesty's Government, Competition Commission (2000), Supermarkets, Vol. 1, Summary and
Conclusions, Hansard, London.

Her Majesty’s Government, Competition Commission (2007a), Working Paper on Land Holdings
and Use Issues, Competition Commission, Hansard, London.

Her Majesty’s Government, Competition Commission (2007b), working paper on Land Holdings,
available at: www.competition-commission.org.uk/inquiries/ref2006/grocery/pdf/
working_paper_land_holdings.pdf

Her Majesty’s Government, Competition Commission (n.d), various reports, 2000-07, available at:
www.teamlimited.co.uk

Herber, B. (1995), Modern Public Finance, R.D. Irwin, Homewood, IL, p. 190.

Horton, B. (1993), “Appalachian land ownership study: research and citizen action in
Appalachia”, in Park, P., Brydon-Miller, M., Hall, B. and Jackson, T. (Eds), Voices of
Change: Participatory Research in the United States and Canada, Bergin & Garvey,
Westport, CT.

Horton, M. (n.d), The Long Haul, Doubleday, New York, NY, p. 209.

Hudson, M. and Feder, K. (1997a), “Real estate and the capital gains debate”, Working Paper
No. 187, Jerome Levy Institute, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY.

Hudson, M. and Feder, K. (1997b), What’s Missing from the Capital Gains Debate?, Public Policy
Brief No. 32, Jerome Levy Institute, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY, p. 20.

Husing, J. and Pedrin, A. (2002), “Orange-Riverside counties, economic interaction”, Report to
Departments of Transportation, Riverside County and Orange County, CA.

Hyde, W. (1980), Timber Supply, Land Allocation, and Economic Efficiency, Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Jorgensen, E.O. (1925), False Education in Our Colleges and Universities, Manufacturers and
Merchants Federal Tax League, Chicago, IL.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

397

IJSE
36,4

398

Kahn, C.H. (1973), “The place of consumption and net-worth taxation in the federal tax
structure”, in Richard, M. (Ed.), Broad-based Taxes, a supplementary paper of the CED,
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, p. 147.

Keiper, J., Kurnow, E,, Clark, C. and Segal, H. (1961), Theory and Measurement of Rent, Chilton
Company, Philadelphia, PA.

King, W.S. (1988), “Land value taxation in Taiwan”, paper presented at International Seminar on
Real Property and Land as Tax Base for Development, sponsored by Land Reform
Training Institute and Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Taoyuan, Republic of China,
November, pp. 1-25 (paper published as a chapter in Ofori, I (1988), Conference

Proceedings).

Kneese, A.V. and Bower, B.T. (1968), Managing Water Quality, Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD.

Krieger, J. and Banks, H. (1962), “Ground water basin management”, California Law Review,
Vol. 50, p. 56.

Krueger, A. (1974), “The political economy of the rent-seeking society”, AER, Vol. 64, pp. 291-303.
Krugman, P. and Wells, R. (2006), Economics, Worth Publishers, New York, NY, p. 283.

Kurnow, E. (1959), “Land value and the single taxers”, Commercial and Financial Chronicle,
Vol. 190, p. 834.

Kurnow, E. (1960), “Land value trends”, Land Economics, pp. 342-3.

Kuttner, R. (1980), Revolt of the Haves, Simon & Schuster, New York, NY.

LA Times (1980), “Oil firms give up offshore leases”, LA Times, November, p. 1.
Levin, H. (1971), Invisible Resource, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Lincoln, D. (1995), The New Times (Arizona), November 8.

Love, J. (1980), “The structure of state taxes on oil production”, p. 13 (draft MS).

McBride, M. (1924), Chief Justice, Oregon Supreme Court, 1924. Opinion In re Hood River,
pp. 190-1.

McDonald, S. (1963), Federal Tax Treatment of Income from Oil and Gas, Brookings, Brookings,
SD, p. 23.

McLean, I. (2005), “The politics of land tax — then and now”, in Maxwell, D. and Vigor, A. (Eds),
Time for Land Value Tax?, The Institute for Public Policy Research, Oxford, pp. 17-31.

McLure, C. Jr and Zodrow, G.R. (1994), “The study and practice of income tax policy”, in Quigley, J.
and Smolensky, E. (Eds), Modern Public Finance, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, p. 186.

Macinko, S. and Bromley, D. (2002), Whe Owns America’s fisheries?, Center for Resource
Economics and The Pew Charitable Trusts, Covelo, CA.

Mills, ES. (1998), “The economic consequences of a Land Tax”, in Netzer, D. (Ed.), Land Value
Taxation: Can It and Will It Work Today?, The Lincoln Institute of Land Policy,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 44-7, Chapter 2, pp. 31-48.

Moley, R. (1939), After Seven Years, Harper & Brothers Publishers, New York, NY.

Montgomery, R.H. (1940), Brimstone Game, The Vanguard Press, New York, NY.

Musgrave, R. and Peacock, A. (1959), Readings in the Economics of Taxation, Irwin,
Scarborough, pp. 13-18 (reprint).

Musgrave, R., Carroll, J.J., Cook, L.D. and Frane, L (1951), “Distribution of tax payments by
income groups: a case study for 1948”, National Tax Journal, Vol. IV No. 1, pp. 1-53.
Myerson, A.R. (1994), “Kuwaiti Government to sell Santa Fe’s petroleum assets”, New York
Times, reprint July 2, 2008.

Netzer, D. (1966), Economics of the Property Tax, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

Netzer, D. (1973), “Is there too much reliance on the local property tax?”, in Peterson, G. (Ed),
Property Tax Reform, The Urban Institute, and The Lincoln Institute, Washington, DC.

Netzer, D. (1998), “The relevance and feasibility of land value taxation in the rich countries”,
Paper presented at a workshop sponsored by The Lincoln Institute of Land Policy,
Phoenix, AZ, January.

Noyes, R. (Ed) (n.d.), “Capital gains and the future of free enterprise, now the synthesis”,
available at: m.gaffney@dslextreme.com or c/o Department of Economics, UC Riverside,
Riverside, CA 92521, available at: www.masongaffney.org

Patterson, T. (1991), The Search for Water: How Riverside got an Early Start,
The Press-Enterprise, Riverside, CA, April 28, p. B-5,

Phillips, K. (2008), “Numbers game: why the economy is worse than we know”, Harper’s, May.
Pigou, A.C. (1928), A Study in Public Finance, 3rd ed., Macmillan, London, p. 105 (1947 reprint 1949).

Pleydell, A. and Wood, E. (1960), How Tax Exemption Broke the Housing Deadlock in New York
City, Citizens’ Housing and Planning Council of New York, Inc. (CHPC), New York, NY,
Appendix 23.

(The) Press-Enterprise (2004), Press-Enterprise, Riverside, CA, -B1, February 16.

(The) Press-Enterprise (2007), Data from First American Real Estate Solutions, Riverside, CA,
October 21, 2007, p. G4.

Quillen, E. (2002), “Baca ranch foreclosure sale”, Colorado Central Magazine, June.
Ramsey, F. (1927), “A contribution to the theory of taxation”, EJ, Vol. 37, pp. 47-61.

Reeb, D. and Howe, E. (1994), The Historical Evolution of State and Local Tax Systems, Advisory
Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Washington, DC.

Reynis, L. (2004), address to Congress of Georgist Organizations, meeting in Albuquerque, NM,
July. Reynis is Director of the Bureau of Business and Economic Research, University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.

Riew, J. (1980), several articles on Taiwan, available from the author, Department of Economics,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, PA.

Rothbard, M. (1997), The Single Tax: Economic and Moral /mplications, Edward Elgar, London.

Schwartz, E. and Wert, J. (1958), An Analysis of the Potential Effects of a Movement toward a
Land-Based Property Tax, Economic Education League, Albany, NY, pp. 19, 23.

Scott, A. (1987), “Faustmann, Martin”, in Eatwell, J., Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (Eds), The New
Palgrave IH, The Macmillan Co. Ltd, London, pp. 495-96.

Seligman, R.A. (1895), Essays in Taxation, Macmillan Co., New York, NY, pp. 70, 72.

Shoup, D. (2005), The High Cost of Free Parking, American Planning Association, Chicago, IL.
Simon, J. (1996), The Ultimate Resource, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Smith, B. (1960), Latifundia in Gitchee Gummi, Grand Rapids: self-published.

Stiglitz, J. (1986), Economics of the Public Sector, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, NY.

Tideman, N. (1999), “Taxing land is better than neutral: land taxes, land speculation and the
timing of development”, in Wenzer, K. (Ed.), Land-Value Taxation: The Equitable and
Efficient Source of Public Finance, ME. Sharpe, Armonk, NY,

Veseth, M. (1990), Mountains of Debt, Oxford University Press, London.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

399

IJSE
36,4

400

Vickrey, W. (1947), Agenda for Progressive Taxation, Ronald Press, New York, NY.

Vickrey, W. (1971), “Tax-induced slow turnover of capital, Part V’, AJES, Vol. 30 No. 1,
Appendix II to Gaffney, M. pp. 105-11.

Vickrey, W., Auerbach, A. and Minarik, J. (4.992), “Federal Tax Policy for the 1990s”, Annual
Papers and Proceedings, American Economic Association, Nashville, TN, pp. 257-73.

Wendt, P. (1961), Dynamics of Central City Land Values, Research Report 18, Real Estate
Research Program, University of California, Berkeley, CA, pp. 40, 42.

Wilks, H.M. (1964), Rating of Site Values: Report on a Pilot Survey at Whitstable, Rating and
Valuation Association, London, p. 14.

Woellert, E. (2007), “Pickens’ water plan”, Bloomberg, November 6.

Wunderlich, G. (1967), “Taxing and exploiting oil: the Dakota case”, in Gaffney, M. (Ed),
Extractive Resources and Taxation, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI,
pp. 289-94.

Young, A. (1929), “Review of A.C. Pigou: a study in public finance, 1928”, E/, p. 15.

Young, GF. (1930), The Medici, The Modern Library, New York, NY (preface dated 1910,
reprint).

Further reading

Archibald, J. and Hansen, J. (2002), “Land is power, and most who wield it are outsiders”,
The Birmingham (Alabama) News, October 13.

Back, K. (1970), “Feasibility of assessing land value”, in Holland, D. (Ed), The Assessment of
Land Value, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Behrens, J. (1984), “Assessors, recorders, and computers and where they now stand”, Office of the
Chief of the Taxation Branch of the US Bureau of the Census, Washington, DC
(unpublished paper).

Burnham, S. (1978), The Landed Gentry, GP. Putnam’s Sons, New York, NY (orig. 1968).
Business Week (1961), (re Empire State Building), September 2, pp. 69-72.

Carson, R.T. and Mitchell, R.C. (1988), “The value of clean water”, discussion paper, Department
of Economics, UCSD, San Diego, CA, pp. 88-13.

Carson, R.T. and Navarro, P. (1988), “Ryndamental issues in natural resource damage
assessment”, NRJ, Vol. 28, Fall, pp. 815-36.

Coase, R.H. (1960), “The problem of social cost”, Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 1-44.

Conway, E. (2003), “Damon estate (Hawaii) puts commercial land up for sale”, The New York
Times, July 5.

Cooper, G. and Daws, G. (1985), Land and Power in Hawaii: The Democratic Years, University of
Hawaii Press, Honolulu, HI.

Coupal, J. (2003), cited in The Press-Enterprise, Riverside, CA, February 1, p. Al4.

Cummings, R., Brookshire, D. and Schulze, W. (1986), Valuing Public Goods: An Assessment of
the Contingent Valuation Method, Rowman & Littlefield, Totowa, NJ.

Dales, J.H. (1968), Pollution, Property and Prices, University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Economics (n.d), October 3, pp. 1-44.

Fischhoff, B. (1990), “Mitchell and Carson: using surveys to value public goods”, Public Opinion
Quarterly, Book review, Vol. 54, pp. 286-9.

Gaffney, M. (1960), “Rural-urban competition for water”, JFE, Vol. 42 No. 5, pp. 1363-6.
Gaffney, M. (1962), “Ground rent and the allocation of land among firms”, in Miller, F. (Ed.), Rent
Theory, Problems and Practices. North Central Regional Research Bulletin 139, University
of Missouri Research Bulletin 810, Columbia, MO, pp. 30-49; 74-82.

Gafiney, M. (1965), “Property taxation and the frequency of urban renewal”, Proceedings of the
: NTA, 57th Annual Conference, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, pp. 272-85.

Gaffney, M. (1973a), “A critique of federal water policy”, in Haveman, R. and Hamrin, R. (Eds),
The Political Economy of Federal Policy, Harper & Row, New York, NY.

Gaffney, M. (1973b), “An agenda for strengthening the property tax” (originated as “The property
tax and intergovernmental relations” (1972), The President’s Advisory Commission on
Intergovernmental Relations, September 14, pp. 1-33), in Peterson, G. (Ed.), Property Tax
Reform, The Urban Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 65-84.

Gaffney, M. (1973c), “Tax reform to release land”, in Clawson, M. (Ed.), Modernizing Urban Land
Policy, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD, pp. 115-52, republished in Compact Cities:
A Neglected Way of Conserving Energy, (Congressman Henry Reuss), Joint Hearings,
Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs; and Committee on Interstate and
Foreign Commerce, US House of Representatives, 96th Congress Ist Sess, USGPO,
Washington, DC, 1980, pp. 246-82.

Gaffney, M. (1976a), “Capital requirements for economic growth”, US Economic Growth from
1976 to 1986: Prospects, Problems and Patterns, Vol. 8, Joint Economic Committee,
Congress of the United States, pp. 56-75.

Gaffney, M. (1976b), “Toward full employment with limited land and capital”, in Lynn, A. Jr (Ed),
Property Taxation, Land Use and Public Policy, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI,
pp. 99-166.

Gaffney, M. (1978a), “Social and economic impacts of foreign investment in US land”, NRj,
Vol. 17, pp. 377-93.

Gaffney, M. (1978b), “Proposition 13: an alternative reform” (“Tax limitation and its
alternatives,” Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, Sta Barbara, August 1978),
The Center Magazine, Sta Barbara, November/December 1978, pp. 19-28.

Gaffney, M. (1981), “Effects of severance taxation on industrial efficiency and state revenues”,
Invited Testimony, California State Assembly Committee on Revenue and Taxation,
Hearings on Oil Severance Taxation and AB 1597, 15 October 1981, pp. 1-13 (ater
published in Groundswell, July/August, 2006).

Gaffney, M. (1988a), “Tapping land rents after proposition 13”, Western Tax Review, annual,
pp. 1-55.

Gaffney, M. (1988b), “The role of ground rent in urban decay and revival”, The Henry George
Lecture, St John’s University, September 1988, Distinguished Papers No. 89F-1, November
1989, Business Research Institute, St. John’s University, pp. 1-15, distributed by the Robert
Schalkenbach Foundation, New York, 2nd printing retitled “How to revitalize a failing
city”.

Gaffney, M. (1991), “Capital’ gains and the future of free enterprise”, available from the writer,
m.gaffney @dslextreme.com, available at: www.masongaffney.org, or percent, Department
of Economics, UC Riverside, Riverside, CA.

Gaffney, M. (1993), “Land reform through tax reform”, in Franzsen, R. and Heyns, C. (Eds),
A Land Tax for the New South Africa?, The Centre for Human Rights, Faculty of Law,
Universiteit van Pretoria, Pretoria, pp. 111-26.

Gaffney, M. (1995), “Property tax reform in the big picture”, Conference on Land, Wealth, and
Poverty, The Jerome Levy Institute, November 3, 1995, pp. 1-25.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

401

IJSE
36,4

402

Gaffney, M. (1999), “Recent changes in Canadian fiscal federalism”, in Wenzer, K. (Ed),
Land-Value Taxation, ME. Sharpe, Armonk, NY, pp. 58-99, reprinted, Hinois Real Estate
Letter, Spring, 1999, Office of Real Estate Research (ORER), University of Illinois, Urbana,
IL, pp. 49.

Gaffney, M. (2000), “Immobile taxation in a World of mobility”, in Wagner, R. and Racheter, D. (Eds),
Federalist Government in Principle and Practice, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA,
Chapter 5, pp. 97-109.

Gaffney, M. (2004a), “Auri sacra fames”, Groundswell, May/June.

Gaffney, M. (2004b), “Megabucks for Negabucks: solving the water crisis”, Groundswell,
March/April.

Gaffney, M. (2007), “2rate in reverse: preferential assessment of land”, Groundswell,
March/April.

Galanter, C.R. (1991), “Collecting rents for the use of airspace at LAX”, address to the annual
meeting, CGO, LA.

Goldberg, L. (2004), California Commercial Property Tax Study, California Tax Reform
Association, Sacramento, CA, 926 J St no. 710, 95814.

Goodall, M. (1991), “Property and water institutions in California”, Merrill (unpublished paper).

Haig, R.M. (1921), “The concept of income”, in Haig, R.M. (Ed), The Federal Income Tax,
Columbia University Press, New York, NY.

Hanemann, M. (1991), “Willingness to pay and willingness to accept: how much can they differ?”,
AER, Vol. 81 No. 3, pp. 635-47.

Hawau Housing Authority v. Midkiff (1984), 467 US 229.

Heller, W. Jr (1999), statement to the writer.

Hulten, J. Sr (1957), report to Mayor of Honolulu on assessments of vacant land.

Internal Revenue Service (n.d.), Annual, Your Federal Income Tax, US Dept. of the Treasury.

Johnson, G. (1950), “Resource allocation under share contract”, Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 58, pp. 111-23.

Kahn, A.E. and Davidson, P. (n.d.), cited in Gaffney (1967), p. 410.

Liebman, E. (1983), California Farmland: A History of Large Agricultural Holdings,
(re Williamson Act usage by J.G. Boswell and other giant owners).

Manvel, A. (1957), Sales/Assessment Ratios, US Census of Governments, Quinquennial from
1957.

Manvel, A. (1968), “Trends in the value of real estate and land, 1956 to 1966”, Research Report
No. 12, US National Commission on Urban Problems, Washington, DC, 1968, pp. 1-17.

Mitchell, R.C. and Carson, R.T. (1989), Using Surveys to Value Public Goods: the Contingent
Valuation Method, Resources for the Future, Inc., Washington, DC.

Mountain Association for Community Economic Development (MACED) (1999), Javesting in
Kentucky’s Future, Barea, KY.

Page, T. (1977), Conservation and Economic Efficiency, Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD.

Paulson, A. (2007), “In US Midwest, young farmers priced out of land”, The Christian Science
Monitor, March 22.

Powell, M. (1999), Science at EPA: Information in the Regulatory Process, Resources for the
Future, Washington, DC.
Rybeck, W. (Ed.) (1990), From Poverty io Prosperity by 2000, Center for Public Dialogue,
Kensington, MD, passim, pp. 6-60.

Sapiro, S. (1996), “Who owns heavenly Hawaii?”, Insights, Vol. IV No. 3, pp. 3-4.

Sapiro, S. and Gwartney, T. (1995), letter to Wm. Hauck, 28 September, detailing abuses of
Williamson Act in Orange County, CA.

Schultz, T.W. (1954), “Some guiding principles in organizing agricultural economics research”,
JFE, Vol. 36, pp. 18-21.

Shoup, D.C. (2002), Curb Parking: The Ideal Source of Public Revenue, The Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.

Simons, H. (1938), Personal Income Taxation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Sinai, T. and Gyourko, J. (2003), “The (un)changing geographical distribution of housing tax
benefits, 1980-2000”, draft, November 20. Calculated from Table A, The Wharton School,
Philadelphia, PA.

Tullock, G. (1967), “The welfare cost of tariffs, monopolies, and theft”, WEJ, Vol. 5,
pp. 224-32.

Turgot, A.RJ. (1766), “Réflexions”, translated by Jupp, K. (1999), The Formation and Distribution
of Wealth: Reflections on Capitalism, Othila Press, London.

Vickrey, W. (1959), “Testimony on social costs of the private automobile”, Committee on
Transportation, US Congress, reprinted in Journal of Urban Economics ca. 1995.

Vickrey, W. (1964), “Pricing in urban and suburban transport”, Proceedings of the AEA,
pp. 452-65.

Vickrey, W. (n.d), seminar at Princeton University on “hypercongestion” not published, and
notes not found. This is based on a statement by Vickrey scholar Richard Arnott.

Walters, A. (1955), “Article on traffic congestion”, Econometrica, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 295-302
(reprint part of a Mohring collection of classics in the economics of transportation).

Appendix 1. Thirty-one reasons why land valuations assessed for tax purposes fall
short of market values

* Conventional use of fractional assessments in many states. This makes the nominal tax
rate much higher than the real rate, while hiding the real value of the tax base{52]. Some
surveys based on assessed values correct for this obvious downward error, but some do
not.

* Tendency to assess land on the assumption that current uses will be permanent.
The market values much land higher, often much higher, than its current use warrants,
based on a prospective quantum leap into a higher-valued use. Most state laws specify
market value assessments, based on the economists’ “opportunity cost”, and the
real-estate man’s “highest and best use”; but many assessors honor this law only in the
breach. Many other specific laws, cited below, encourage this practice for specified classes
of land or land use; but it happens anyway, without specific laws.

* Lag of assessments behind rising land values, and behind falling building values. True
building values fall constantly with depreciation and obsolescence. Increasingly, this
extra-legal assessment-lag has been institutionalized, as in Proposition 13, California,
which freezes land assessments at the 1977 assessment (plus a nominal 2 percent annual
rise, and reassessment on new buyers). 1977 assessments of vacant land were obsolete
even in 1977[53]. Startling examples of the results come to light when a public agency
condemns land and is forced to pay a price based on current market values. In 1995 a jury

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

403

IJSE
36,4

404

awarded $43 million to the Domenigoni family for their land near Hemet, taken for a water
reservoir by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. That Price was about
40 times the assessed value for tax purposes[54].

Use of capitalized income method for assessing business properties (other than
apartments). The bias is against more intensive business uses in every choice between
lower and higher uses. The cash income of a vacant parcel, for example, is zero, but that is
only one extreme case. More generally, vast and valuable lands are “derelict”, i.e. used
below capacity. One reason for that is to avoid the very taxes that land-value taxes would
obviate.

Ina rising market the bias is against owner-occupied residences, because these are assessed
on the basis of comparable current sales. In a rising market, comparable sales include a
premium based on expected higher resale values, while capitalized income is based on
current income alone. Robert Kuttner has attributed the agitation for Proposition 13
in California to this disparity. In the absence of understanding panic played on fear-haunted
minds, skillfully stampeded by cooler ones (Kuttner, 1980).

In dividing land vs building values, failure to assess land first, using maps, with building
value as the “residual”. This simple matter, so easy to state briefly here and pass by,
involves huge values, bleeding land value into building value[55].

Conventional preference given to acreage, regardless of location. An example, one of
millions, is the southwest corner of the Allis-Chalmers plant site in the northeast corner of
downtown West Allis, Wisconsin. The unsubdivided land in the industrial parcel is
assessed much lower per square foot than the otherwise comparable commercial land on
the other three corners. The assessor declines to recognize and value the subdivision
potential in acreage.

Omission of acreage from otherwise helpful studies by Allen Manvel with The US Census
of Governments. The Census published these from 1965, quinquennially, until terminated
in the Gingrich era. Illinois Senator Paul Douglas, former Professor of Economics at the
University of Chicago, had supported Manvel’s work, and used it in his Report of the
National Housing Commission, 1967. Manvel relied on sales/assessment ratios from a
huge data-base such as only the Census could assemble. These showed systematic bias in
assessed values, undervaluing land relative to buildings. Manvel’s work, however,
blanked out unsubdivided acreage, the most underassessed class of land even then, and
moreso now[56].

Classification of land for taxation, with preferential low assessment for lower uses. In
California, some favored use-classes are farming, timber, and private golf courses.
Alabama has another set of low-tax classes, favoring land in forests and hunting grounds,
catering to the Heston gun vote, in league with absentee corporate owners (and, for no
theological reason, organized churches). Lands in the favored use-class are assessed by
capitalizing their visible money income from the official use only, thus exempting from the
tax base all values from manorial, recreational, and blood-sport uses, and all speculative
values derived therefrom. In vast rural and sylvan and littoral areas these other influences
are the main source of market value.

Retention and expansion of lands in low-taxed use classes. The Los Angeles Country Club,
with 39 de luxe holes, preempts about 500 acres (est.) of the most valuable space in
southern California. It runs north from Century City at Santa Monica Boulevard, straddles
Wilshire and continues north through Holmby Hills toward Sunset Boulevard. It abuts
9900 Wilshire Boulevard to the east. 9900 Wilshire sold in April, 2007 for $62 million
per acre, a record price for Los Angeles (the Macy’s there was a tear-down). At that price
500 acres would come to $31 billion, in round numbers, but you will find no such
calculation on the assessment rolls. The California Constitution, Article XIII, Section 13,
limits the assessed value of members-only country clubs to capitalized income, which is
near zero. A few golfers, rich as they are, could not hang on to such an asset if taxed ad
valorem like their neighbors. But they do hang on, and new golf courses are multiplying
like rabbits in the Coachella Valley (Palm Springs), which now has over 100 courses,
soaking up scarce waters in a Sonoran desert and taking lands off the tax rolls while the
Governor and leading water officials exhort median, taxpaying citizens to conserve water
by drinking, bathing and flushing less.

About one-third of the privately owned land in the USA is in timber. Timber lobbies are
quietly powerful, and have made “Smoky Bear” part of our value system. Their P.R.
machine and allied Schools of Forestry condition minds so successfully that all the USA.
States have preferential tax laws. They exempt standing timber from property taxes,
substituting a “yield tax” at nominal rates that are far below being revenue-neutral.

In California, I have estimated the value of timberland in Mendocino County (prime
redwood country) at $1,400 per acre for the land value based purely on timber culture,
considering no other values. Yet, under California law its assessed value for taxation is
only $156, about 11 percent of its true value just for timber culture. This is accomplished
by legislating the valuation formula in Sacramento (California Revenue and Tax Code,
n.d). The formula mandates that “income-based” assessments be derived using past
prices, projected into the far future with no adjustments for inflation, but discounted at a
high interest rate (Le. a rate not adjusted for inflation). It is clear for whose benefit this law
was framed (Gaffney, 1995). Timber counties, stripped of their natural tax base, replace
their revenues by pleading poverty to get subventions from state and Federal taxpayers.
Federally, Congress has made timber a “capital asset”, so the gains of growth are taxed
only at sweetheart rates as “capital gains”, with many loopholes available. At every turn,
timberlands and timber contribute little or nothing to public revenues, while their fiscal
potential is hidden under legislated low assessed values, and low reported taxable income.

Assessments capped by large-lot zoning, or exclusive farm or timber zoning, even when
the market does not believe the zoning will endure, or be enforced. In the case of California
timber, landowners can withdraw their land from the tax-favored timber preserve zone at
will, with no penalty, and no back taxes.

Regressive assessments, swayed by case law that reflects differential ability to finance
lawsuits and appeals, as well as by the NIMBY bias against poor neighbors. The land use
LEAST likely to be underassessed is rental housing, especially apartments. Then the
resulting hardship cases are used in campaigns to demand lowering assessments on
owners, often painted as poor widows. For poor and pathetic, look to the tenants evicted
daily, with little keening from the Howard Jarvis Taxpayer Association.

Discounts for oversized lots that should be further subdivided.

The opposite of discounting for oversized lots is discounting for undersized lots. In the
language of appraisers, that is failing to value the “plottage” potential of undersized lots.
“Plottage” is the premium value per square foot that is gained by assembling undersized
lots into optimal sizes. This is a major matter where high-rise buildings are trying to
supersede older low-rises on small lots, and mails are trying to replace retail strips, and
subdivisions are trying to replace mini-lots in strings, each with its own driveway
accessing a state or federally financed highway. Not only does the assessor miss the
speculative plottage value in the small lots, he obstructs their assembly into optimal sizes
and shapes by raising assessed values after the assembly occurs, when and if it does. To
solve this problem, many cities have been lending their power of eminent domain to
private developers, generating fierce ideological battles pitting doctrinaire libertarians
against city officials, while private parties quietly skim off the cream.

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

405

YSE :
36,4

406

Where rents are capped by law, failing to value the equity that the protected renter has
carved out of the landowner’s equity.

Failure to publicize assessed values. In some states the values are closed to public
inspection, defying “sunshine” laws. Reynis has attested to secrecy enforced by law in
New Mexico (Reynis, 2004).

Exempt lands, owners, and land uses. Churches, often targeted, are relatively minor
offenders. Cemeteries are major. These include secular commercial ventures that hold vast
lands for future gravesites and monuments. Sacred or profane, they consume more than
their share of water, often at preferential rates. Full or empty, they get in everyone’s way
as one navigates around town. In industrial-dependent Milwaukee, cemeteries preempt
more space than all industry, which helps account for the city’s 20 percent population
decline since 1960. One of San Francisco’s assets making it so famously livable is its
absence of cemeteries, banished to outside the city limits since about 1900. The US Navy
ties up much of San Diego’s waterfront. The Marine Corps has the Miramar Air Base,
while to the north it keeps Camp Pendleton on 13 square miles of prime coastal land.
The March Air Force Base keeps 14 square miles (9,000 acres) in the growth paths of
Riverside and Moreno Valley, CA. New York City and Washington, DC, are notorious for
their “free lists” of exempt lands. Once an agency acquires land it never again appears in
the budget, so bureaucrats squander it.

Homestead exemptions, in some states. These are a good idea, but widely abused to
exempt most owner-occupied home values from taxation, to justify shifting fiscal burdens
to rentals, and to sales and excise and gambling taxes aimed at the poor.

Preferential underassessment of lands with low turnover, legalized in California and
widely practiced elsewhere, legal or not. The result is extreme underassessment of lands
that do not sell, ike corporate holdings, member-only golf clubs, and dynastic holdings of
inherited lands.

Rail and utility adjunct landholdings, i.e. other than their ROW. These are state-assessed,
not on local tax rolls; and are usually assessed as acreage. Taxes, such as they are, are
passed on to ratepayers in the rate-regulation process. Vast holdings by rails include 10
percent of Chicago, just off The Loop; 5 percent of Milwaukee, centrally sited in the
Menominee Valley; vast SP holding south of Market Street in San Francisco, and
statewide[57].

Hydrocarbon holdings by regulated utilities.

Rights of way. Assessors ignore monopoly power inherent in rights of way, and assess
ROW land on its value in the best alternative use.

Discounts to large owners who have policy of slow sales or leasing. Such discounts are
given to Oregon timber; to Appalachian coal; and many extractive resources. They are
also given to laggards in ecotones, in consideration of their policies of selling slowly to the
cream of the market.

Conventional reluctance to base assessments on speculative values, even when
condemnation awards are so based.

Downvaluing land when the title is clouded by a covenant against competition, or other
reservation held by a former seller against a present owner. Where such covenants are
allowed at all, the beneficiary of the covenant should be assessed for the loss of value —
but never is, to my knowledge.

There, then, are 31 reasons why reported assessed values of land understate its true value. This
should serve as a caution against accepting data simply because they are “official” or “standard”,
or because “errors will tend to offset one another”, as Ernest Kurnow alleged. Kurnow assumed
errors were random, and did not consider they might be systematically biased downwards, as
they are. Yet, in spite of these biases, and others to be shown below, The California State Board of
Equalization reports that 42 percent of the assessed value of real estate in the State is land value.
The true figure is surely higher than 42 percent, for the reasons given, yet even 42 percent makes
a mockery of the widespread belief among economists, promoted by Northwestern University
Professor Mills and others, that “real estate” value is mostly building value.

Appendix 2. Rounding out the EBCOR model, treating capital costs explicitly

In the core model (Table {, in the text) we simplified by consolidating expenses and capital costs
as “C’, so N = G — C. For many readers this will be enough to make the point, and what follows
is more, and slower slogging, than they need or want. Those readers may stop here: the main
points have been made.

Others will demand a fuller and more sophisticated accounting, which follows. Accountants
generally divide these mobile human inputs (CQ) into two parts: current expenses and durable
capital. The durable capital has to be converted to an annual equivalent, to make capital costs
commensurable with annual expenses. This is done by multiplying the value of capital on the
land times the sum of an interest rate plus a depreciation rate. Summing that up in one line (but
still oversimplifying):

N=G-—E-K(i+d). (Al)

where:
* N — net revenue.
* G-— gross revenue.
* E-— expenses (current).
* K — capital, at current value.
¢ 4 — interest rate.
+ d— depreciation rate.

It is common to simplify the expression by consolidating the first two terms into one, called “cash
flow.” Thus:

G-E="cash flow". (A2)
Likewise, Ki + d) is called the “user cost of capital:”
K+ d) = “user cost of capital”. (A3)
Net Revenue is also called “Rent.” Thus:
Rent = Cash Flow less User Cost of Capital. (A4)

Defining and measuring rent then resolves itself into defining and measuring each of the
component terms, in some detail. That is a 2-h lecture at least, which time precludes here, and
which some of those who have read this far (presumably those who relish the challenge not to
quit earlier) could deliver themselves, anyway. Two points should be made immediately,
however:

(1) “K@ + d)” overstates and oversimplifies the user costTPZt of capital in all years after
the first, because the relevant value of K falls each year, with depreciation. A normal way
of handling this is to multiply K times the installment plan factor (IPF), aka the “Capital
Recovery Factor,” (and by other names) to get a level annual flow. It yields a value

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

407

IJSE
36,4

408

somewhat higher than Az, and lower than K(i+ d). Finding the IPF requires a life
estimate for K, which gets interesting but is beyond the present scope.

(2) Aneasier way of handling this matter is to shift the analysis from “rent,” an annual flow,
to DCF of land; and finally from DCF based on one life cycle to DCFP, accounting for all
future life cycles of replacement capital. An example is given below, using DCFP.

Having set up the model in either of those ways, we are equipped to forecast the likely results of
various alternate tax policies that distinguish among the variables given: capital, expenses, gross
revenues, life of capital, ratio of capital to land value, etc. I conclude by showing how such a
model is set up, in a simple case.

A model incorporating capital theory

Gordon Tullock has suggested (at least orally) that the model below merely replicates the thesis
of Henry George. It is true, of course, that George favored land taxation, for approximately the
reasons advanced above, but he was innocent of any correct capital theory. Many aspects of his
work suffered for it. The model below is based on a kind of capital theory Wicksell certainly, and
Bohm-Bawerk probably, would have loved, but George never developed, and never could have
developed without repudiating the unfortunate Book I (“Wages and Capital”) of Progress and
Poverty.

Treat the DCFP derived from a land improvement as a residual, and impute this residual
value to land. Find algebraically the ratio of after-tax land value to before-tax land value. If the
ratio is simply (1 — 2) (where ¢ is a tax rate), the tax is neutral — the highest and best use of land
after tax is the same as that before tax. [The ratio might also be 1/1 + #, or some equivalent,
and be neutral.] The value of the ratio (1 — 4 is independent of any parameter the landowner
controls. To repeat, the tax base on marginal land must be zero, lest the land be sterilized. [A zero
tax on marginal land implies a zero tax for the marginal investment on all land, a requisite for
neutrality.]

We can analyze or just inspect many parameters in the ratio to find what specific avoidance
maneuvers a tax will induce, and to estimate what excess burdens will result. In this paper, we
analyze effects on substitution of capital for labor and for land, including effects on capital
turnover and frequency of site renewal. We analyze differential effects on different grades or
qualities of land. By modeling different kinds of tax regimes, we can also show how to find
revenue-neutral tax rates, when tax A is substituted for tax B. We can point towards
dangerously snowballing “Laffer-Curve Effects,” and how to minimize them by selecting more
neutral kinds of taxes.

The present example uses timber culture, because this enables a simple analysis, along with
continuous grounding in reality. Timber is a good allegory for all other forms of investment. It
also occupies 32 percent of the private land area of the nation, and is weighty in its own right
(Daugherty, 1955). This short paper does not treat other kinds of capital explicitly, but does
explain a simple means of modifying the analysis to do so. The writer has published the relevant
mathematics elsewhere (Gaffney, 1976a, esp. Appendix 1).

The present example models just one kind of tax, a harvest or yield tax. “Yield” taxes are
imposed on the harvest value of timber (“stumpage”), net of harvest costs, but gross of up-front
capital costs. The tax rate is flat, at rate t. The taxable event is timber harvest. Yield taxes are
widely alleged to be neutral, because the growth rate of stumpage after-tax is the same as it is
before-tax. Our analysis is more comprehensive, however, considering the whole investment
cycle, and finds several dimensions of heavy bias. First we set up the model:

* S-— site value from DCF absent taxes

* R-— revenue from “stumpage” (sale value net of harvest costs) at maturity (year “m”)
* m — maturity (years from planting to harvest)

* 7 — relevant interest and discount rate
* 4 tax rate applied to the base “R” after m years
¢ P— planting cost, year zero

One may incorporate intermediate costs and revenues in the model, without disturbing it, either
by compounding them forward to year m (where they are commensurable with “R”), or
discounting them to year zero (where they are commensurable with “P”). This lets us analyze
cycles of timber culture in their totality, unbound by the simple case where all costs are incurred
at time zero, and all revenues come at one other point in time. Better yet, this is the simple means
wherewith one can generalize the model from timber to any other kind of capital-improvement,
whatever its time-pattern of costs and revenues.

Site value (S) is the present value of timber less its planting cost (P). That residual value is
imputed to the site. To make it hugely more general and useful, and only marginally more
intricate, we assume the investment cycle to be repeated every m years, in perpetuity. That
accounts for the “ - 1” in the denominator of equation (5):

R-Pe™
Equation (A5) is Faustmann’s formula for “Soil Expectation Value,” widely discussed in the
jiterature. It is derived by discounting the numerator not just once, but as an infinite chain
repeatable in perpetuity (Gaffney, 1957; Scott, 1987, and works there cited). [A simple derivation
is to begin with (P+ Sle” =R + S, and solve for 5.] An advantage of this model is to dispense
with any arbitrary limit on the time horizon; it lets us treat capital turnover and replacement.

To show the effect of a yield tax, let:
g, site value after yield tax

RQ ~ t) — Per
c=

emi —] (A6)

By inspection, since P is not deductible, there is a leverage effect in the tax: it falls harder on
marginal investments. It induces entrepreneurs to abort marginal investments on all land, and all
investments on marginal land, causing an “excess burden.” By assumption, this excess burden
does not result from forward shifting to consumers with elastic demand; nor from backward
shifting to suppliers of capital or labor. It results from “downward” shifting to land. It changes
what now appears to the owner as the highest and best use of land, after-tax.

To measure the bias, we find o as a fraction of S: ;

P/S

o/S= 1-145 (A7)

—@ mh
Equation (A7) is smaller than (1 — 2), except when P = O. Simple inspection of the algebra now
lets us identify several kinds of bias. Eaution (7) is highly sensitive to the parameters P,S,i,and
m. (7) isa decreasing function of P, and an increasing function of S, m, and i. Thus, the yield tax
biases landowners in the following ways:

+ against intensive planting (high P),
* against shorter cycles (low 12); and
* against marginal land (low S).

It also magnifies the advantage of those with strong financing (low i) over those with weak
credit. The last force will act towards fostering higher concentration of ownership.

Taxes on marginal land are greater than zero. (7) may easily become zero or negative,
meaning land will have no use at all (without adapting the parameters to avoid taxes). If after-tax

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

409

IJSE
36,4

410

land value is zero or less, land-time has no value to the owner, and there is no economic reason to
restock land. The combination would lead to a bias in favor either of non-use, or of “volunteer”
regeneration, where P is held at zero. This comes at the cost of deferring m and lowering R,
possibly to zero, Bias is a maximum against marginal land (ow S} and, by clear inference,
against marginal increments of P and R to all land.

Table AI displays the bias by numerical example, using 7 = 0.07 and ¢ = 0.40. The 40 percent
yield tax rate is chosen because it is the revenue-neutral rate corresponding to a one percent
property tax rate, as explained and calculated later.

To avoid taxes, landowners are induced to move from the upper right towards the lower left
in Table AL, i.e. from high P/S and low m to low P/S and high m. The resulting loss of net present
value before tax is a measure of excess burden. Just how far each landowner will move depends
on a host of particulars far too numerous to treat in the small compass here. The point is that the
tax introduces a powerful arbitrary bias acting in predictable directions.

Laffer-curve effects. Using the above modeling technique, the writer has calculated the effect
of a property tax on standing timber (exempting the site) on the DCFP after taxes on the timber,
Using an assumed tax rate of 1 percent, and setting this DCFP equal to that of timber after a yield
tax, it is possible to estimate the revenue-neutral yield tax rate corresponding to a property tax
rate of 1 percent. The calculation and the parameters are not all shown here, but it turns out to be
about 40 percent, if tree-life is 50 years.

Thus, a yield tax rate of 40 percent is needed for each 1 percent cut in the property tax, for
revenue neutrality. At such a high rate, there would be a severe “Laffer-curve Effect”: a higher
rate bringing in lower revenues. This Effect might be so strong that no yield tax rate, however
high, could replace property tax revenues.

In most states, however, the yield tax rate is much lower. In California the rate is capped at 2.9
percent, levied in lieu of a 1 percent Property tax rate. This entails not just a change in the tax
base, but a near approach to tax exemption. The low tax levy makes yield taxation popular with
forest interests. It conceals the severe excess burden yield taxes would impose at revenue-neutral
rates. (Another factor, in Realpolitiz, is the insurance against double taxation such as might occur
if an owner were to pay property taxes for many years and then be faced with a newly enacted
yield tax).

Shorter rotations make the revenue-neutral yield tax rate lower, but even where rotations are
15 years instead of the 50 years used before, it still takes a yield tax rate of 20 percent to be
Tevenue-neutral. That is lower than 40 percent, but still consistent with our basic finding that
very high yield tax rates are required for revenue-neutrality.

In addition, there are other taxes to consider. The yield tax levied in lieu of a property tax
induces foresters to lower both the amount of P and its frequency as well. Lower and less
frequent P also means lower and less frequent harvests, where most payrolls are generated —
and taxed. Payroll taxes, income taxes, sales taxes, gasoline taxes, and all other activity-based
taxes come along less often and in lesser amounts, If we summed all taxes generated in forests,
and in ancillary activities, yield taxes higher than the 40 percent shown would be needed for
Tevenue-neutrality, Again, rates this high would cause a heavy “Laffer-curve Effect” such that
revenue neutrality might never be attained. Certainly it never HAS BEEN attained.

The landowner subject to yield taxes is in the same Position as a share tenant. Modern work on
share tenancy, following Gale Johnson and Stephen Cheung (1969), also stresses the logical
counterpart: crop-sharing motivates tenants to take up land without limit. Private landlords big
enough to dominate their markets use their bargaining power to prevent that, by limiting the land
they mete to each tenant; but the fisc (viewing it as the landlord collecting a crop share) has no such
power over private landowners (viewing them as tenants of the fisc). A by-product of yield
taxation is, therefore, a tendency toward reenforcing concentration of ownership of forest land,

Many forest outlays come well after time-zero: examples are thinning, pruning, fire and pest
control, and timber stand improvement. Each such outlay is a separate investment cycle of
shorter life than m. Its resulting revenue is the increment it generates in total &. Each such cycle
PIS=> 0.2 0.5 0.75 1 15
m l-e - - - -
5 0.30 0.33 — 0,07 — 0.40 — 0.73 -14
10 0.50 0.44 0.20 0.00 - 0.20 — 0,60
15 0.65 0.48 0.29 0.14 — 0.02 — 0.32
20 0.75 0.49 0.33 0.20 0.07 - 0.20
50 0.97 0.52 0.39 0.29 0.19 — 0.02
60 0.99 0.52 0.40 0.30 0.20 — 0.01

Notes: Values of o/S (from Equation (7), where = 0.07; t = 0.40

The hidden
taxable capacity
of land

411

Table AI.

would be punished by a yield tax in terms of its own short life, not the entire tree-life cycle of m
years. The bias against such outlays is, from Table AI, obviously extra heavy.

Corresponding author

Mason Gaffney can be contacted at: m.gaffney@dslextreme.com

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com

Or visit our web site for further details: www-emeraldinsight.com/reprints
