          The Water Giveaway: A Critique of Federal Water Policy*
                                          Mason Gaffney, 1973
   The many wasteful policies and procedures in federal water resources programs have been
much analyzed by economists and other scholars. Agency benefit-cost practices have been found
wanting. Benefit estimates have been biased upward and cost estimates downward.
Environmental effects of projects, often adverse, are not weighted enough. I generally endorse
the thrust of these criticisms and will not repeat them here. Rather, I will discuss a few equally
significant questions which have been neglected.
WASTEFUL PRACTICES AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES
Giving Away Public Resources
   Public water policy has been dominated by a giveaway psychology. Dam sites, water rights,
and de facto licenses to pollute water have gone free of any but occasional nominal charges to
individuals, corporations, and municipalities. It is as though the Interior Department gave Texaco
the rights to offshore oil gratis, and then paid for their drilling rigs to help develop the country.
   Economists have rightly condemned the use of sub-market interest rates in appraising federal
works. The use of zero-interest for all costs that ingenuity can allocate to “irrigation” benefits of
a project is an outstanding outrage. The use of zero rent on public sites and waters is equally
outstanding.
   The resulting damages are several:
    1. The pressure to put resources to their best use is abated. When valuable land and water
inputs are entered at zero value, any of several projects can show super-unitary benefit-cost
ratios and appear economical. When these resources are appraised at their highest and best use,
and their value entered as a cost, only one use plan for a given resource is economical: the best.
It has a ratio of one: all others fall below. (It is not, incidentally, the same project whose ratio is
highest when no rent is charged. Rather, it is the project yielding the greatest excess of benefits
over costs, i.e., net benefits or surplus.)
   That is just elementary economics, one of the first things we teach freshmen. But analysts of
public projects often overlook it, perhaps trying to accommodate themselves to the giveaway
tradition. The result is often to fail to scan all alternatives for a site or stream. For example, a
recreational use might be highest for Canyon X, but if a power company gets it before the Park
Service does and can show a ratio of 1.01, it’s gone.
   2. The pressure to develop water prematurely, preemptively, is paramount. The prospect of
future rents has a present value long before there are any present rents. Enjoyment of those future
rents goes to him who establishes his claim, usually by first possession and use. It takes little
imagination to foresee the results, which one observes everywhere. Scores of state and federal

In Robert Haveman and Robert Hamrin (eds.), The Political Economy of Federal Policy. New York etc., Harper
and Row, Publishers, 1973.
Excerpted and reprinted from statement of Mason GAFFNEY in U.S. Congress, joint Economic Committee,
Economic Analysis and the Efficiency of Government, Part 2, Hearings of the Subcommittee on Economy in
Government, September 1969.
Mason GAFFNEY was then a Research Associate at Resources for the Future, Inc., Washington, D.C.
                                                                                                    2


agencies, municipalities, corporations, and individuals race for one resource after another, not
because they need it now, but to keep those greedy other fellows from hoarding it.
   Congressmen will recognize the same uneconomic motivation at work in the scrambles for
broadcast licenses, air routes, quotas, trucking routes, pipeline routes, bank charters, and other
valuable resources and monopolies it gives away without competitive bidding.
   At least four congressional policies reinforce the overwhelming pressure toward premature
capture and development of water.
   One is an income tax matter. The premature developer of a resource may lose money for years
while it is submarginal. These losses are currently expensible, i.e., shared by the Treasury each
year. Actually they should not be, for they are a long-term investment designed to capture the
resource while it rises in value. Now if Congress had accepted the advice of eminent public
finance economists such as Joseph Pechman, William Vickrey, and Richard Musgrave, and
moved to a “comprehensive income tax base” (often called a “Haig-Simons” definition of
income) as Canada’s Carter Commission has recommended there, and subjected the capital gains
accrual of resource value to the same effective tax rates as ordinary income, it would be all right
to expense those early losses. But Congress has not done so. So the taxpayer can expense early
operating losses which he invests to capture a resource, while he pays no tax on the resource
appreciation which he captures.
   Looking at this in terms of “tax expenditures,” the United States is not only giving away water
resources, it is advancing some half of the private investment required to capture the resource
with little hope of ever getting its principal back. The best it could do through future taxes is
recover its own principal with interest. The private investor’s interest is tax-free.
   A second reinforcing policy is racing for farm production quotas. During the Korean War, for
example, cotton quotas were eased. The availability of water let California expand cotton
acreage and establish histories of production. After the war when quotas were re-imposed,
California was in. More accurately, those landowners were “in” who had access to uncommitted
land and water at the crucial time.
   A third reinforcing policy is that old devil, “logrolling.” Whenever there is a giveaway,
naturally everyone wants some. Since a Congress cannot very well commit its successor to honor
cloakroom bargains, everyone wants some right now. A concrete start is the most convincing
commitment Congress can give. And so we have chronically too many starts and too few
completions. The economist would say, rank your projects and give priority to those that
generate the most surplus of benefits over costs (present-value basis). The exigencies of vote-
marshaling interfere with such priorities, and say, “start something everywhere at once.”
    A fourth reinforcing policy is in the public regulation of utilities. Rates are reckoned so as to
allow a specified return on the “rate base,” or invested capital less depreciation. Every utility
seeks to magnify its rate base. One way is to invest in submarginal waters. Regulatory policy lets
utilities recoup the losses by charging higher rates in their rich, surplus-yielding territory.
   Of course Congress has only limited influence on state regulation, but it has greater influence
on federal commissions, and potentially could dominate most power utility regulation because of
interstate ties and the use of federal property.
   3. A third damage from giveaways is distributional. The successful early preemptors of
submarginal waters are those with the greatest waiting power. That is, they are the wealthy. But
                                                                                                 3


regardless of who they were before, they become wealthy and powerful once they have nailed
down the resource, and it rises in value. They become a privileged class.
   4. Water is misallocated. Some submarginal projects remain submarginal, but they do not
lose control of their water. Some allocations, that once were economical, become obsolescent
and stop yielding surpluses; but they keep their water. Water is very hard to transfer, once
allocated, because the beneficiaries generally have no clear title they can convey — after all,
they never bought one. The federal owner is not charging them any rent, so they hang on without
cost to themselves.
   5. Water is underpriced and wasted. Underpricing results not merely from the water
giveaway, of course, but from that plus other subsidies like zero interest. The wastes that ensue
are more than meet the eye. It is often assumed that cheap water encourages intensive farming,
but the reverse is true. If California farmers had to pay $20 an acre-foot for water they would
feed the world. It takes intensive farming to pay such prices, and this may be observed in areas of
dear water. As one moves from south to north in California, for example, the humidity rises and
the agriculture declines. Cheap water favors sloppy, extensive farming, with water being
substituted for labor and farm capital.
  This in turn affects project costs. To achieve a given output, when water is cheap, more water
must be delivered per acre, and more acres served. Distribution being the costliest element of
water supply systems, this magnifies costs.
   Dear water from federal projects would encourage economy not just of water but of land. The
Bureau of Reclamation does not sell direct to individuals, but wholesales water to irrigation
districts. These pass on the cost to their land-owners, but not entirely as user charges. They also
levy land taxes, and these encourage early, compact, and intensive use of land under the ditch.
Imbalance, Deferred Impact, and the Unknown
   Considering the several subsidies involved, capital obviously flows more easily into water
projects than into ordinary private investments like barns, fences, or machines. Thus public
investment tends to get ahead of matching private land development. This adds to the waiting
period during which the public investment is sterile.
   The balance is partly redressed, but on the whole probably worsened, by the impact of federal
taxes on land developers.
   The favored treatment of capital gains makes it very attractive simply to hold land while
federally financed flood control or water supply enhance its value. The result is “irrigation
sprawl” or simply agricultural sprawl in flood-protected areas. Land speculation jeopardized land
development long before income tax accounting, became a major factor; now the holdout
motives are redoubled. Federal subsidies also mean that local property taxes are minimized, and
those that do come are deductible, i.e., shared by the Treasury.
   On the one hand, capital investments in “water conservation” are expensible. Expensing of
capital investments is tantamount to complete tax exemption or more, because the most the
Treasury can recover is interest on its own investment. This, coupled with SCS [Soil
Conservation Service] subsidies, has certainly caused enormous capital to be invested on private
land.
    Some of this capital must complement public works and help redress the balance. On the
                                                                                                   4


other hand, some of it no doubt is completely substitutional. Indeed, the assessments paid to
irrigation districts, through which public water must be distributed, are not deductible, so tax
shelter is denied to the most complementary of all local water investments.
    Regardless of the balance between public and private works, there is clearly a bias toward
water-related capital. Here we are flying blind. No one seems to know how much capital has
been invested in farm water systems. There is a remarkable gap between $13 billion of net farm
income estimated by the Commerce Department and U.S.D.A. and $2.5 billion dollars reported
to the Internal Revenue Service, which no one can explain, except that the discrepancies are on
the cost side. Expensing of capital investments is certainly involved. Big capital items that may
be expensed are breeding stock, soil conservation, and water conservation. The enhanced land
value that results from the last two is virtually tax-exempt income for anyone with a good
lawyer.
   So Congress is continuing to subsidize a particular kind of capital outlay without much
knowledge of how much has been sunk already. It is reasonable to infer that water-related capital
has now gotten far ahead of its complements, and further subsidy is undesirable.
Slow Payout
   Premature investments, and submarket interest rates, and logrolling and waiting for capital
gains, all imply a long wait between investment and payout.
   From a certain narrow political view this has attractions. Many constituents are enriched by
unrealized, untaxed capital gains. And since production increase is at a minimum, prices are
sustained, letting more and more land be enhanced elsewhere.
  When we look at some other burning issues, the picture changes. One is inflation. Investments
whose output is small or deferred are inflationary, creating demand without supply.
   Another is poverty. Investments which lie on the land passively for decades before turning
over are complementary to land but not to labor. just as water which is recycled rapidly can do
more work and complement more inputs than water which is recycled slowly, so capital turning
over fast employs more men, and relieves more poverty, than the same capital turning over
slowly. Every time capital turns over and is reinvested it employs men, and feeds their families.
Federal policy tends to freeze capital in massive monuments from which it is seldom recovered
fast. Federal works are capital-intensive; they create a minimum of jobs per thousand (or in this
case million) dollars sunk.
   When the Bureau of Reclamation began business in 1902 it had something called a “revolving
fund.” It was to recover this each 10 years and reinvest it, so the same capital would by now have
been used several times. It was a splendid idea, but that the fund has yet to complete the first
revolution. This, I am afraid, symbolizes the whole dreary tale of dragging, lagging results and
payouts from federal water enterprises.
Regressive Distribution
   The prime beneficiaries of federal water and flood control projects are landowners. The
holdings are often very large, the benefits narrowly focused on a small number. No one at all
familiar with the Tulare Basin, the West Side of the San Joaquin Valley, or the Mississippi Delta
will question this for a moment. These are extreme cases, where some ownerships exceed
100,000 (sic) acres receiving benefits, and more elsewhere. Obviously in other service areas
                                                                                                    5


ownerships may be smaller but still represent large fortunes.
   The costs are borne by the federal taxpayer. Until recently, “everyone knew” that the federal
income tax was highly progressive. This year, thank goodness, the truth has dawned and
everyone knows that the federal income tax has devolved into a payroll tax, with high
exemptions on property income.
   The income of the wealthy beneficiaries of water service may be very lightly taxed. A recent
U.S.D.A. study shows that of the largest 66,000 farms in the United States two-thirds reported
net losses from farming! These, incidentally, are those large farms which “everyone knows” are
more efficient. As to their accrual of land value, that is virtually exempt from income tax in
practice. I ask leave to submit an appendix on the many routes by which land income escapes
taxation.
IS REFORM POSSIBLE?
   Water institutions have proven peculiarly refractory to reformers. Ten years ago I had a go at
them, and soon felt like the melodious Paul Simon whose “words like silent raindrops fell, and
echoed in a well of silence.” Lest this seem like a personal Cassandra complex, I and others have
found a warm welcome in tax reform; but, other critics of water policy have been equally
unavailing. Few policies, indeed, have been so exposed and pilloried by so many economists,
and so little defended, with so little result.
   Nothing improves. On the contrary, wilder and wilder plans are seriously discussed in these
very halls. That “great land-locked” Tulsa is soon by your hand to become an ocean port, and I
do not doubt the Corps of Engineers would carry the channel to the summit of Pike’s Peak
should you authorize it.
   The line-up of vested interests opposing reform is formidable. Water law is a WPA for
lawyers. Every project is a WPA for civil engineers, who have been defined by Boulding as men
who can tell you the best way to do something that should not be done at all. Many projects are
WPAs for marginal mountain counties who sell their votes for local dams. Every project is a
consumer of cement. Every project extends the job security of bureaucrats, whose motto might
be “Pour cement or perish.” And above all the beneficiary landowners are constantly lobbying,
and playing on the hysteria so easily aroused in matters regarding water. It may not be irrelevant
that water and land are symbols of motherhood.
   Who, then, will speak for mankind? Is there any hope of a breakthrough? I believe I see
several counter-forces developing.
   One is the universities. For years, their influence was thrown the other way under the sway of
Keynesian doctrines that endorsed all public spending. Today they are dropping that and
analyzing choices among alternatives. Since one major alternative is the university itself…need I
go on? Governor Reagan dramatized the point recently by offering to trade a university for a new
water source.
   Another is the acute capital shortage of our times. High interest rates are the market’s way of
signaling the shortage of housing, inventories, gymnasiums, equipment, urban sewers, and a
hundred other capital items we have failed to replace and expanded while freezing our treasure
into cement yielding 3 percent or nothing, and quite irrecoverable for years (wouldn’t it be nice
to have it back now at 10 percent?). Fun is fun, but many of these shortages are reaching crisis
proportions and cannot be ignored.
                                                                                                    6


   A third is the youth rebellion with all it implies. The effective rebels of course are not the
louts, but the working leaders like Nader and Yannaconne who have learned how to mobilize
idealism and move mountains.
    Fourth is the wilderness conservation movement, spearheaded by the redoubtable Sierra Club
and its new, taxable lobbying incarnation. They may be True Believers. But if we must choose -
and we must-between them and the excesses they fight, they are clearly the better choice. And so
I think there is some hope of reform.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
   Congress obviously suffers from certain problems of internal organization. I will not presume
to comment on these before men who know them better than I. Rather I will tell you what if I
were king I should try to accomplish. Congress needs a superior substitute for logrolling. Trading
votes is essentially the way one region pays another for a share of the common wealth—basically
a reasonable concept. A problem is that often the only coin in which payment can be made is
another water project, when a hospital is needed more; or a project of any kind, when reduced
taxes are needed more. Another problem is that all jurisdictions have equal bargaining strength,
while capital is much more productive in some than others.
   So how else may the beneficiaries of public works compensate other Americans? By paying
more taxes. It’s surprisingly simple. The whole wretched, corrupting business of lobbying for
and horse-trading federal largesse, which seems so intractable that many observers and citizens
lose hope in Congress and lean more and more towards a strong executive—this whole business
has a solution. Lincoln Steffens observed that the troublemaker in Eden was not Eve, nor yet the
Serpent; it was the Apple! Taxing the beneficiaries of federal works should serve wondrously to
dehydrate the apples of discord on Capitol Hill.
   The beneficiaries of public water works are surprisingly easy to identify. The works service
certain defined lands. The landowners gain. Other local beneficiaries are subject to competition
from immigrants. Land cannot immigrate; it appreciates instead.
   But federal income taxation virtually exempts land appreciation. If you work for a living you
pay the full tax rate on ordinary income. If you improve land under federal works and match the
federal enterprise with private enterprise, your land income is mostly “ordinary” and taxed at full
rates. But if you can influence public officials to improve your land while you do nothing, your
income is almost all your own.
   And so it pays landowners to commit great effort to drumming for federal aid. This has
always been a problem, but has worsened in our times because of the cumulative perversion of
the federal income tax into a payroll tax. Another problem is the declining role of the property
tax, which used to socialize a good share of land value increments. The latter long decline is in a
short-run reversal. The former is in the hand of Congress. As you labor in the vineyard of tax
reform, you have an opportunity to prune the apple tree of discord with the same strokes.
   Congress should charge market prices or rents for federal property. It should encourage the
states to do likewise with state property, as a condition of federal aid. No state should get away
with giving away its valuable resources to local influentials and then pleading poverty in
Washington. Congress should assert federal property rights aggressively when they are
paramount, and convey them unequivocally and explicitly when it releases them, not to the end
of grabbing everything in sight but of creating a certain and workable tenure system.
                                                                                                     7


    It should certainly not do this in one stroke, without detailed analysis. Hydrology and water
law are complicated. It should immediately commission a group to return recommendations for
clarifying federal water rights. The difference between this and previous and ongoing efforts
would be the posture of the United States as a great landlord seeking to maximize income from
its domain. Economic analysis will show this is also the way to maximize general welfare.
   The benefits are the converse of the problems cited under the section entitled “Giving Away
Public Resources.” There is more pressure to put resources to the highest use. Premature
preemptive appropriation is stopped. Distribution is better. Allocation is better. Waste is reduced.
   An important added gain from asserting public property rights is to solve the “pollution
conundrum” of who should pay whom for doing or not doing what. To some people it is self-
evident that polluters are no better than louts who would nuisance on the public streets, and
should control themselves at their own cost and be grateful if they are not jailed for past
obscenities. To others it is equally clear that people who want a clean environment should pay
polluters not to pollute. The latter school is waxing mighty in the learned journals. Although I
have never understood how they would limit the number of those who must be paid not to
pollute, they have managed to lend respectability to those who would love to be paid a good
price to relinquish the waste-removing capacity of the common water which they have
appropriated in the past.
   Assertion of public ownership resolves the conundrum. Neither beneficiary of water pays the
other. Rather, both pay the government: the ones an effluent charge for unavoidable waste
disposal; the others a variety of user or standby charges, depending on their terms of access to
the water.
   As part of this effort, Congress should assume great responsibility to use its unique powers in
resolving interstate water conflicts. It should abandon such economic monstrosities as the
Colorado River Compact, which rigidly divides water among political states regardless of
demand, and find a formula that recognizes productivity and requires repayment.
   Another function uniquely tractable to federal powers is that of pooling, and integrating local
projects. Power pooling is a fact over wide areas. Pooling of water supply, storage, power
generation and flood control are much more limited. Conjunctive use of surface and ground
storage is barely begun. The obstacles of law, institutions, and local vested interests are
formidable. The federal might is often the most potent available engine of reform.
   Congress should move toward full-funding of a few projects at once, and away from yearly
appropriations for more projects than available funds can complete in a reasonable time. A
“reasonable time” depends on the interest rate. Money doubles in a number of years equal to 72
divided by the interest rate. At 7.2 percent, for example, money doubles every 10 years, and
quadruples every 20. If a construction job is stretched out to 20 years the early costs are
quadrupled by the delay. Obviously, the delays we learned to accept at low interest rates are no
longer reasonable.
   Once the logrolling logjams are broken by tax reform and beneficiary charges, endless
possibilities open up for rationalizing the timing of works, and ranking projects by priority. This
requires use of a reawakening subdiscipline of economics known as “capital theory.” Congress
should commission expert studies on this topic to develop criteria for priorities.
    Now, some development is postmature. Probably more is premature. In general, priority
                                                                                                      8


should go to projects yielding the greatest surplus per dollar of cost, as of now, on a present-
value basis.
   But this needs to be tempered by holding off on sites that are ripening very fast to still higher
uses. Capital theory needs to teach us how to make this trade-off.
   Congress should scratch “regional development” as a benefit from any project. All projects
are regional. The concept is either meaningless, or else a thin cover for vote-swapping,
maintenance of obsolete congressional districts, and sinking the nation’s dwindling treasure into
submarginal projects.
    Congressmen who are tempted to go on piling concrete into every narrow gorge with a
strident lobby could do worse than to review the history of a previous boom in water works, the
canal boom that busted in 1836. They went wild, simply wild over regional development. Some
states have outlawed state bond issues ever since.
   Another pressure to resist is that of designating the Corps of Engineers and the S.C.S. as
“antipoverty” agencies. A dollar invested in any hamburger stand does more to fight poverty
than ten spent by the corps, which has demonstrated beyond misunderstanding its eagerness to
serve the very, very, very rich by servicing their lands, free. It is an “arrangement” of long
standing, a scarlet affair beside which the novel of the same name pales into dull gray.
   Not only does the hamburger stand employ more people per dollar of capital, it feeds them as
well, and it does both things many times a year as each dollar turns over and over. If we aim to
deploy our capital to fight poverty we need channel more of it into small, labor-using businesses
that produce useful goods. The Corps of Engineers does not recover its capital outlays for
decades, if ever, either directly or from increased tax collections. Each new project requires new
capital, so that over the years the sum of capital invested for every job created is greater than in
any private industry except tombstones. Monumental engineering works are the tombstones of
civilizations. Pharoah had his pyramids; Caesar had his aqueducts; and Uncle Sam…may profit
by their example.
