                 What Price Water Marketing?:
                         Cal4fornia's New Frontier

                                  By Mason Gaffney*

ABSTRACT. We can multiply the value of output from limited natural water
supplies by allocating them to higher uses. To this end we need a market
in raw water, but existing markets work badly, for several reasons. Sellers
are undermotivated, absent taxes or debt. Free groundwater subverts the
pricing of surface water. Loss of elevation, and damage from effluents, and
instream uses are not charged for. Obsolete subsidies abound; obsolete
entitlements dominate allocation. Some trades extinguish public rights.
Rent-seeking distorts allocation. Needed public agencies have been sub-
verted by organized land speculators. Recommendations are given.


                     The Delayed Coming of Water Marketing
THIS 'V1UTER HAS A LONG TRACK record, from 1960, championing water mar-
keting. In those days we were beset by those saying we already had it,
others saying it would be a disaster if we did, and some saying both things
at once. Now, however, market champions are popular—even legitimate—
and their philosophical burden is light. This might seem a blessing, but
doctrinaire marketeers may have carried a good idea too far. The first step
toward the market solution is always to convert existing tenures, which are
now conditional and temporary, into absolute property rights. This move
wipes out obligations to the public—yet usually includes within the prop-
erty obligations so created duties by the public to subsidize the owners.
Firm up property rights, the market champions say, give out negotiable
titles on all water sources, declare a free market, and let the good times
roll (Phelps et al. for the RAND Corporation, 1978; Anderson, 1983b).1

   *
     Professor Mason Gaffney is a Professor of Economics at the University of California,
Riverside. His interests indude urban economics, land and resource economics, public
finance, and the history of economic thought. Recently, he published with coauthor Fred
Hamson, The Corruption of Economics (London: Shepheard—Walwyn Ltd., 1994), and
"Land As a Distinctive Factor of Production" in N. Tideman, ed., Land and Taxation
(London: Shepheard—Walwyn Ltd., 1994).
American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 56, No. 4 (October, 1997).
 1997 American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Inc.
476           American Journal qf Economics and Sociology
  At this time, water marketing is the rage. In 1982, a forward-thinking
legislator, Richard Katz (D-Sylmar), sharing in part the Anderson-RAND
viewpoint and seeking more water for Southern California, carried a statute
to remove certain ancient legal barriers to selling or leasing water permits.2
The Environmental Defense Fund, originally a reforming group, has turned
into more of a brokerage house, combing the state to negotiate deals. In
1986 a new Katz bill passed, letting private water sellers use conveyance
facilities of public agencies.3
  A third Katz bill died in 1991. Senator John Seymour, during his brief
tenure, tried a bill to let federal water be sold, with existing subsidies
firmly attached. Senator Bill Bradley along with Congressman George
Miller tried a bill with at least token recoupment of public costs required,
and stricter acreage limitation. It has been a busy time for water mar-
keting legislation.

                                      II

                   Water Is The "Yield-Cutting Substitute"

CRrncs OF WATER MARKETING FRET that areas losing water may become un-
productive. No doubt there are cases in point. Elsewhere, however, overall
potential gains from reallocating water actually exceed what simple cal-
culations predict. That is because water, in many areas, has been used as
a "yield-cutting substitute"—a term I have had to coin for lack of standard
theoretical treatment of what should be a basic tool of economic analysis.
Water is such a potent substitute for labor and capital that more water often
means lower yields from each acre. The productivity of water is measured,
not in higher yields, but in lower labor and capital costs that raise net rents
in spite of lower yields. I am not aware that farm production economists
have ever faced up to this phenomenon and its implications.4
   Thus, lesswater per acre may mean more output per acre, an uncommon
and momentous relationship. Conversely, when water is cheap it is sub-
stituted for labor and capital. The effect of cheap water may be seen in
Fresno, Kings, and Tulare Counties, California. Their populations grew by
32 percent during the 1940's when water was expensive. Then they re-
ceived an influx of cheap water from two federally subsidized projects: The
Pine Flat Dam on the Kings River and the Friant-Kem Canal of the Central
                              Water Ma rketing                            477

Valley Project. For the next 30 years their populations stopped growing
and even fell through outmigration (Ballard, 1980, p. 30).
   In Tulare county, in 1974, wages and salaries accounted for only 50
percent of income payments (California Statistical Abstract, cit. Ballard,
1980, p. 28). Faims receiving the federal water subsidy were 7.2 times
larger, on the average, than other California irrigated farms (calculated by
Villarejo, 1986, p. 20). By 1980 California's Central Valley contained six of
the ten American cities with the highest proportion of people on welfare
(Metropolitan Area Fact Book, 1984, cit. Villarejo, 1986, p. 109). Two of
them were Visalia and Fresno, in the region receiving federal water.5 Cheap
water has not converted the Great Valley into a beehive any more than
cheap power has converted the Tennessee Valley. Indeed, it has degraded
life in the Great Valley.
   When water is dear, and users perceive that dearness, less is used. Less
is used because users switch from primitive furrow irrigation to sprinklers,
spitters, and drip methods, thereby conserving water. This in turn allows
for innovative techniques such as growing avocados on steep hillsides for-
merly considered wasteland. These water conservation efforts produce a
yield representing more dollars of product for less water.
   The fact is, farmers cannot afford to dump high-priced water on barley,
or alfalfa, or rice, or irrigated pasture. Yet today, these low-valued crops
still drink up most of California's water (Dean's Committee, 1968, p. 48)
while using under lO% of its farm labor (Mitchell, 1993). A number of
fairways and even cemeteries would also give way to higher-valued uses
if water were priced dearly.6
   Professor Mark Kanazawa correctly reminds us that the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation (BR) uses non-price rationing in many service areas, so its
projects may have less surplus to export than its pricing policy alone sug-
gests to the theorist who looks only at price. However, in this case the price
theorist is basically right. There are leaks in the non-price rationing system.
There is no effective limit on the amount of land for which an individual
may obtain water rights but he may apply that water to less land, and pump
groundwater for the rest. Groundwaters replenished from BR imports are
not considered supplied by the project, hence this water usage is not lim-
ited or counted. Besides, the BR is serving whole farms and huge districts
that cannot pay the true social cost of storing and delivering water. In other
words, the opportunity cost of using water is in many instances not covered
478            American Journal of Economics and Sociology
by the subsequent (marginal) value that is produced by the extra water
consumed.
  All of this leads to a wonderful corollary: You can tax water withdrawals
without hurting the water-based California economy. A simple solution to
many of our intractable water problems would be a severance tax on water
withdrawals.7 Legally, if you can regulate it you can tax it.8 A tax, properly
gauged, is an economic price charged by the owner of water (the State of
California) for using its scarce property. If the market champions, along
with Chicago-School economists and allied "new resource economists,"
were more thorough in their support for the price system (and less mis-
trustful of the taxing power of legislatures), they would boost this appli-
cation of basic price theory with all their influence and talent.

                                     III

                      Barren Results of Water Marketing

SADLY, THE RESULTS OF THE WATER MARKETING MOVEMENT thus far have been
meager, considering the pent-up pressures for economical transfers.9 There
are offers and refusals but a wide gulf still exists between negotiation and
any consummation of a deal. The water market is still only as fluid as glue,
if that. Only one of the larger deals has reached a final result, and that only
partially and haltingly.1° This was true even during and after five years of
drought from 1986 to 1991, with severe crises in Santa Barbara and Mann
Counties, whose respective abilities to pay cash for water are substantial.1'
   In 1991 Assemblyman Katz moved a third time, seeking to remove still
more obstacles to water sales (Ellis, 1991b; Ellis, 1991c). His latest proposal
was to let individuals sell without the approval of the water districts that
serve them. This tracked a major RAND recommendation (Phelps et al.,
1978). Katz's proposal enjoyed editorial support of the Los Angeles Times,
ever thirsting.12 This move failed.
   Water marketing is a worthy goal and deserves support. Katz's 1991
move, however, carried this doctrine beyond reasonable limits. The prob-
lem is, this change would have subverted the integrity of rural district dis-
tribution systems.13 It would not tap a new artery, but rather only tap a
scatter of local capillaries.14
  Actually, some Mutual Water Companies already provide long experi-
ence with alienable individual shares. It took a state constitutional amend-
                              Water Marketing                              479
ment, but irrigation districts can and do buy and hold shares in these com-
panies (Gaifney, 1961). It would be prudent to observe the results. In the
Kaweah Delta, this has resulted in Balkanized, intertwined, overlapping,
money-wasting, water-wasting distribution lines and service areas that cry
out for rationalization and economy (Gaifney, 1961). Frustration over mar-
ket torpidity could lead to damaging, ill considered measures. This one,
fortunately, died.'5
  Senator Katz, in this case, did not identify the basic causes of market
torpidity. Water is already legally alienable, after a fashion, and has been
for many years. California Water Code Sections 1700—05 spell out the pro-
cedures. According to a 1942 California case, "The appropriative right is—
separable and alienable from the land to which it became initially appur-
tenant; . . ." (Wright v. Best, 1942, cited in Hutchins 1977, Vol. III, p. 191).
In 1940 the Madera Irrigation District (I.D.) sold its water "filings" on the
San Joaquin River to the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation for the Central Valley
Project (Downey, p. 6). More generally, galloping urban sprawl in southern
California has been watered by continual urbanization of indigenous farm
supplies, using legal condemnation procedures and the legislated domestic
priority where necessary.
  "Water banking," too, has been around a long time. In the 1940s and
1950s bureaucrats in the BR tried to implement water pooling along Cali-
fornia's Friant-Kern Canal (a facility well suited to it). They were imple-
menting a policy of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who consistently or-
dered that "all units of the plan should be fully coordinated on a regional
basis" (Maass 1951, p. 233 et passim). They promoted the "9(e)" or utility
form of contract under which water ownership never vested in the land-
owner-customer, but only in the seller, who provided it to customers for a
price: no pay, no water. Water had to be measured. Water could be ex-
changed. There was room for periodic review, renegotiation, repricing, and
reallocation (Graham, 172—90; Taylor, 1949; DeRoos, Chap. 1 1)16
  The BR's avowed aim was to act like a public utility, so each reservoir
and canal "would be operated in coordination with other reservoirs and
canals in the comprehensive plan to deliver water to all areas in the most
economical manner" (U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, 1949, p. 127; California
Farm Bureau Federation, p. 62 if.). The concepts of planning, coordination,
and integration were not federal impositions, as later alleged, but had orig-
inated in California in the 1920s as "The Marshall Plan," promoted by Rob-
480          American Journal of Economics and Sociology
ert Bradford Marshall and other private Californians (notably Rudolf
Spreckels the sugar grower).17 The disputed 9(e) or utility-type contracts
had also originated in California in 1935. The U.S. did not authorize them
until four years later. It was California itself, represented by the very per-
sons who had defeated Upton Sinclair and his programs, that invited the
Federal Government into the state in order to get federal money.18
   The BR's personnel wrote and spoke of "pooling" and "integration" and
sending water "to whichever demand develops first." "Conjunctive use" of
surface and ground reservoirs was a buzzword. They were, in short, to act
on a regional scale the way city water departments act locally, and ration-
alize a Balkanized system. They were doing so only with new waters they
developed, leaving existing uses undisturbed and unpriced.19 They were
doing so only as a wholesaler, leaving retailing to existing local districts
(Maass, 1952, p. 546). The contracting local districts could and did sell
surplus contract waters outside their boundaries. Much of it was used for
recharge.
   In the 1977 drought there was active banking along the California Aq-
ueduct (ironically, from south to north, and from urban to farm use) (An-
gelides and Bardach, p. 17; Robie, p. 49). In 1977, the American Congress
authorized the BR to broker water sales (Robie, p. 49; Saliba and Bush, p.
113; Wahi, pp. 136—38).
  There is more to reallocating water than the simple "free trade in water"
philosophy imagines. What obstacles are really gluing up the market?


                                     Iv
                          Under-Motivated Sellers

As WAThR HAS LONG BEEN legally alienable and transferable, something else
must be wrong. A major flaw in the market is this: the sellers are not
motivated to sell. Water flows are perpetual; sellers do not feel much ur-
gency. Unmotivated sellers may daily coyly, while every year the demand
for their water rights rises. Real estate brokers understand this very well
from costly experience. They learn to screen out unmotivated sellers, who
waste everyone's time dallying. The broker's delight—the motivated
seller—is typically an ordinary family moving to Pennsylvania. Anyone
with surplus land subject to debt and/or property taxes will also be moti-
                              Water Marketing                            481

vated. The cash drain is what attracts the attention of any seller and mo-
tivates him to sell.20
  Farm water districts are the broker's despair. They are not moving to
Pennsylvania, even if the particular individuals in those districts do. The
lands they serve are not moving. Water permits are free of debt (banks
don't lend on precarious tenures), and generally five ofproperty tax. Water
districts with surplus waters are like hoarders during an energy crisis except
that the condition is perpetual. Demand keeps growing—so why not hold
out another few years?
  Another factor described by the Westlands Water District Public Relations
officer Mr. Rob Leake is the "general reluctance" of growers to sell water,
thereby creating "the perception that there are surpluses ..." (Levin,
1988.) Those with precarious tenures know they are insecure, and tiptoe
accordingly.21 Water marketing champions have a simple answer, they
want to make all tenures secure and all tenures marketable. It is not so
simple to do this, in practice however.
   The few big deals that eventually will be cut will not achieve much. The
real estate market works because there are hundreds of thousands of deeds
recorded every year. Ownership rights are clearly defined and publicly
proclaimed at the Registry of Deeds in the county court house. Title transfer
procedures are (relatively) cheap and easy to accomplish. An efficient wa-
ter market would call for the same level of activity; but such a market and
its attendant institutions is nowhere in sight. What is necessary to change
the motivation and get this market working is some constructive use of
taxation: property taxation, severance taxation, or even water royalties are
obvious sticks to supplement the selling-price carrot.22 With such reforms
even the water districts might be motivated to sell and not hold on.

                                     V

                         Leaks In the Market System

THE MARKET RATIONALE CARRIES UTFJ conviction when applied only partially
and half-heartedly. The water market leaks badly.
V.1 Unpriced Withdrawals
   Unconstrained Pumping. Whether by taxation or regulation, we must
control pumping in some manner if any system of surface control is to
succeed. While California rations and conserves surface water, landowners
482            American Journal of Economics and Sociology
in the arid San Joaquin Valley just punch more and more wells into the
aquifers and pump up free water which the state and federal projects re-
charge at high cost. In the drought of 1976—77, 10,000 new wells were
drilled in the San Joaquin Valley (Weatherford et al., p. 1031). Thus they
play out their destined role in The Great Water Treadmill: subsidized water
supplies followed by overdrafts followed by emergency state rescue proj-
ects followed by new overdrafts, and so on until bankruptcy.
  This treadmill started in 1913 when Los Angeles tapped the Owens Valley
waters to supply free water in the San Fernando Valley. The lands there
were timely prepurchased by insiders before annexation, giving a clue to
the forces behind the premature seizures and diversion of water. The tread-
mill drill is often now labeled the "Chinatown Syndrome."23
   And the treadmill keeps turning. The Metropolitan Water District of
Southern California (MWD) keeps pressing for more water sources, wring-
ing its hands over the drought, preaching domestic conservation and im-
posing rationing on its old customers—and annexing new desert lands to
water. "It's hard for the public to understand how you can annex and talk
about a water shortage," stated Lois Boylan Krieger, MWD Board Chair, as
the Board approved another drought-year annexation (Metzler, 199 1).24 It
is hard indeed, and not just for the lay public. A month later she proposed
making more water available for farmers in her district (Bankole, 1991).
MWD maintains a balancing fund to subsidize waste by keeping prices low
during droughts and to prevent peak-load pricing (Krieger, 1991).
   Excess landowners in and around Central Valley Project service areas
routinely gain from recharge that others pay for. CVP contracts even "de-
clare that such water shall not be considered as furnished by the project"
(Ivanhoe v McCracken, 1958, p. 296—97). Kern County landowners keep
irrigating desert lands, overdrafting, and petitioning Sacramento for "emer-
gency" aid. The landowners even oppose metering city water, fearing that
if cities get slapped with meters, their wells are next. (News Services,
1991 )25 They summarized their position this way:
   The existence of overdraft in the southern San Joaquin Valley does not indicate an
   "unmanaged" situation, but only the absence of an adequate supply of supplemental
   water. . (Weatherford, p. 1038).
V.2 Loss ofElevation
  We don't use water consumptively, but return it to the river, says the
rice-grower. Of course, rice growers lose 3—4 feet per acre to evaporation
                              Water Marketing                             483
but by appealing to the Law of Conservation of Matter they pretend to show
the loss of other water is more apparent than real. In terms of the Conser-
vation Laws we consume nothing—we just turn it into useless or bane-
ful forms.
   To properly understand the meanings of "use" or "consume" in econom-
ics we must think in terms of The Second Law of Thermodynamics, the law
of entropy. The water user adds entropy (chaos, disorganization) to water.
He takes in pure water, at a high elevation, at a time and place of his choice.
Next, he returns less pure water at a lower elevation, at another time and
place of his choice, however inconvenient for those below.26 August water
is worth many times September water; rice growers hold August water on
their land and release September water.
   More importantly, power drops are also "non-consumptive," a term of
art that exonerates power companies from the onus of "using" any water.
Actually, this "non-consumptive," use is worth more than all the rest of the
consumptive uses and competes directly with them. The aphorism is that
"people will vote for water but pay for power." Canadians harvest large
public revenues by taxing power drops; and so might we in California.
  Water users also often preempt water from those above. On many
streams th senior permits are downstream. Many legal careers have been
made as downstream seniors enjoined upstream juniors from diverting wa-
ter, to be sure a suitable amount reached the downstream intakes. A good
deal of valuable elevation is thus dissipated to the benefit of no one.27
V.3 Unpriced Effluents
   As to water quality, many return flows are worse than no return at all.
Up north, the notoriety of the Kesterson swamp says it all. Down south,
manure piles around Chino say a lot, too. Abundant groundwater in the
Chino Groundwater Basin "is currently untouchable because of poor qua!-
ity." It is "contaminated with nitrates, byproducts of animal waste and fer-
tilizers from the dairies and other farms in the area" (Salamon, 1991)28
   Then there is the drainage problem. Every irrigation opportunity is also
a drainage problem, usually for someone else. There is no simple market
solution. The runoff is "non-point" and difficult to trace.
V4 Unrepresented Demands
  Environmentalists see economists as ignoring or trivializing their form of
demand for water. Demands for instream uses, recreational uses, fishing,
wildlife, saltwater repulsion, amenities, protection against non-point pol-
484           American Journal of Economics and Sociology

lution, drainage, abatement of common pests like mosquitoes, public
health, aquifer management and protection are often ignored by the econ-
omist (Gaffney, 1989). Too many economists are guilty as charged. Eco-
nomics should deal with how best to meet all human wants, including
those listed plus amenities, pure water, sustained resource supply, water-
shed protection, public health, and conservation. Many water marketeering
economists, however, think only of maximizing GNP measured in the old-
fashioned way developed during World War II for war's emergency pur-
poses and never revised. Worse yet, some others are totally oriented to
property and politics and don't even follow the market. They write only of
sustaining farm land values, disregarding the cost to fish, wildlife, and the
taxpayers (Knapp and Vaux, Jr., 1982)29 The writings of Professors Buch-
anan and Tullock offer a convenient philosophical basis for such a myopic
attitude (Buchanan and Tullock, 1975). Others, however, are developing
an environmental and resource economics.
V.5 Economizing Is Conserving
  The proper aim of economics is inherently prudential. Economics jibes
with conservation especially when dealing with the problem of optimal
water usage. For example, if we put the Santa Ana River of southern Cali-
fornia to its highest and most valued uses, it would eliminate the need for
most water imports, the associated multi-billion dollar costs to the public
along with most of the environmental damage. This river rises naturally in
an area of intense water shortage, yet its claimants waste it. Why? There is
only a trivial variable charge. Instead, there is a yearly fixed cost, at about
$30 per acre foot for a "standard" amount.3° The standard amount has not
changed in a century and is much more water than one properly needs for
any reasonable purpose.
  Meanwhile, the state is importing water here at a true social cost (at the
margins) of about $3,000 per acre foot, one hundred times above the $30
amount the holders of ancient quotas pay. If there were a market where a
person could sell his quota for a tenth of that $3,000 price, he surely would.
But there is no such market, so people don't trade. Thus, thousands keep
wasting water.
V.6 Subsidy Wastes Both Dollars and Ecologies
  Abuse of local waters in arid areas of high demand, like southern Cali-
fornia, results in "hydro-imperialism."31 Local waters are doing much less
work than they might, leading to a steadily increasing demand for imported
                               Water Marketing                           485

water. Hydro-imperialism is the common enemy of both Sierra Club en-
thusiasts and economists. "You have no right to stop growth," says the
hydro-imperialist. True, but neither have we any duty to subsidize growth.
Hydro-imperialists and allied land speculators have no right to demand
subsidies from the general public. Unfortunately, they do demand them,
and they do get them.
  Water supply, flood control, and navigation projects, the traditional
kinds, are heavily subsidized. Subsidy generates waste almost by definition,
in the amount of the subsidy. If it is a subsidy to withdraw water it also
creates scarcity of water where nature may have given us plenty. Consider
the lower Colorado River. Every major user is subsidized, mostly by the
American Congress. No one pays for water at the source, but everyone gets
paid to pump it up and take it home. It is no wonder there is a shortage.
It is also no wonder why there are 82 golf courses operating in the Coach-
ella Valley, a Sonoran desert, and 50 more planned for the future. It is no
wonder the BR can not even find takers for water carried to Phoenix, Ari-
zona in its multibillion dollar Granite Reef Aqueduct. All these dubious ends
are served by impairing our natural habitat and pretending it costs nothing
to do this.
V.7 Correct Economic Analysis Prescribes More Water for Fish
   Twenty-five years ago a study32 on the Fraser River in British Columbia
prescribed sacrificing the fishery to a proposed power project, reasoning
as follows: the fishery has no value because it is overcrowded; its "rent has
been dissipated by the tragedy of the commons." The value of the catch is
only great enough to pay the fishermen and no one else. The fishery as
such therefore has no residual value; it adds nothing to the total value.
Take it away and nothing of value is lost to the economy, that is, nothing
net of costs.
   That is a profound fallacy. The fallacy is to say you should remove water
from the use in which it is most scarce, precisely because it is scarce. This
violates the basic law of diminishing returns. It violates good marginal anal-
ysis, the bedrock of economics. It also "dehumanizes" fishermen and as-
sumes away their readjustment costs, but this is not my major point here.
   The crowding of a resource and the reduction of economic rents does
not mean that the resource is worthless. Rather, it has become extremely
scarce to those crowded onto it, and the marginal value of water added
to that use is extremely high. In terms of redressing unbalanced factor
486           American Journal of Economics and Sociology
proportions, adding water has the same effect as subtracting some fisher-
men from the congested fishery, which the writer of the Fraser River study
would have approved.33

                                      VT


      The Distribution of Entitlements and the Allocation of Resources
VI.1 TheMyth That Water Trades Are Win-win Deals
   Giving away the store hurts the owners. There are "win-win" outcomes
in water trading, but too many of them are "win-win-lose" outcomes. The
loser is the general public which is not adequately represented. The "win-
win" slogan bantered about by most water marketing advocates uncon-
sciously rules the unlicensed majority out of the game. What the majority
loses is its beneficial ownership of water.
   It is wonderful when trading moves water from lower valued to more
highly valued uses. Every economist applauds the better allocation of
scarce resources. As to the distribution of the gains, the economist is trained
to think that it hardly matters at all. The distribution of the gains does
matter—indeed it matters quite a bit.
   However, every sale or trade of existing licenses creates another "inno-
cent purchaser" to legitimize and sanctify the seizure of common property
by powerful individuals and the "public" water districts they control. The
trouble with markets, as currently envisioned, is that ". . . markets reflect
and reinforce the existing distribution of water rights and wealth. .
(Saliba and Bush, p. 252).
  It is not just common water property that is thus traded away by the
water marketing zealots. Subsidies attached to the water are traded as well.
In December 1988, the U.S. Department of the Interior issued a water mar-
keting policy to allow recipients of subsidized water from its projects to
sell the water and keep the profit. The "innocent purchaser" would seem
now to have secured a right to be subsidized by the Federal Government
in perpetuity because he paid for it.
   You would think no one could miss the fallacy. "Because I was robbed
yesterday, . . . is it. . . any reason. . . that the robber has acquired a
vested right to rob me?" (George, 1879, p. 365). Once you deny Henry
George's point and buy into the premise that purchase creates property,
much that is absurd follows. The policy follows the prescription published
                              Water Marketing                             487

by The Institute for Contemporary Studies: "The water bank concept pro-
tects farmers from losing water they now have, and from paying more
money for it" (Angelides and Bardach, p. 33). "The policy was hailed by
the Environmental Defense Fund,. . ." (Levin, 1988). Phelps et al. of RAND
(p. 38) show a more muted propensity to vest the subsidies and carry on.
Resources for the Future chimes in with no muting at all. ". . . federally
subsidized water supplies have become property rights. . . the most ef-
fective way to confront the issue of inefficient usage is to recognize those
rights. . . Rather than attempting to reduce the subsidies embodied in
existing contracts, federal policymakers should seek to make the current
property interests in federally supplied water more secure and to allow
voluntary market trading of the resource among water users" (Wahl,
pp. 3, 5).
   To "get government out of the market," these writers would make gov-
ernment subsidies the very basis of their revised market system! They
would make every giveaway, however, basely originated, into a property
right.35 They would bind taxpayers now and in the future to spend up to
$ 3,000/af to sell and deliver water for as little as $3.00 /af to landowners
who can resell it for as much as $300 /af today and more in the future.
This is an outcome that will produce perpetual financial ruin to the general
public who must foot the bill for these subsidies out of income and
other taxes.
  There is added damage from the message thus sent to future rent-seek-
ers. In the name of the market, these advocates would announce to the
world this policy: "Once get on the dole and you have established an
entitlement to take forever, and call it 'property'." Economists who helped
originate the idea of water marketing 35 years ago (Hirshleifer et al.) were
not out to sanctify subsidies. Their objective was to obviate monumental
new development projects, not foster more. Two points about privatizing
rights that are currently subsidized come to mind. First, the motive to agitate
for new subsidies would be multiplied and second, the state would be
rushed to fiscal bankruptcy.
  A supplemental subsidy has gotten into the system by water "banking."
A state agency buys water at a good price, and risks selling it for less, or
not at all. This was the fate of the California Water Bank, 1991. In spite of
a five-year drought, the Bank found a seller, the Yuba County Water
Agency, with a "phenomenal water surplus." The Yuba agency charged
488           American Journal of Economics and Sociology

$45/af (Bowman). The Bank and its major contractor, MWDSC, then in-
curred heavy losses. Late in August 1991, even at the peak of seasonal water
shortage, MWDSC virtually gave away its contracted bank water, at bargain
winter rates. The water went into ground storage (Muir).37
  "Win-win" has a constructive ring. However, the ring cannot drown out
the basic fiscal truth: no one taps the Treasury or grabs part of the public
domain without hurting everyone else. Those who seize public property in
the name of the free market are not promoting the market, but exploiting
its good name for private monopoly. They are the market's worst enemies:
They stigmatize it, and give arms to its critics. As Theodore Roosevelt said,
we must save the rich "from the ruin that they would bring upon themselves
if they were permitted to have their way" (cited in Seckler, p. 262).
    What we need is a "win-win-win" deal. In the spirit of Henry George,
we can have water banking and common rights: make water permits trans-
ferable, but make permittees and contractors pay for what they get. First,
contractors getting subsidized water from federal and state projects should
pay the full cost of project services, that is without subsidy. LeVeen and
King, for example, have outlined a workable program for the BR (LeVeen
and King, 1985, pp. 148 if.).
    Second, the basic privilege of withdrawing rent-bearing water, surface
or ground, should be subject to a user charge—either as taxation or as a
royalty paid over to the state. With growing demand and scarcity this, rather
than cash operating costs, is the larger matter. This way Smith wins, Jones
wins, and the public wins, hence win-win-win.39
VI.2 Water as Public Domain
   "Water right" is another term of art, promoted to protect licensees under
color of property. "Right" is the wrong word for a claim on water. A right
is something like free speech, possessed by everyone. Water rights, prop-
erly speaking, are common property. Blackstone wrote, ". . water is a
                                                                .


movable, wandering thing, and must of necessity continue common by the
law of nature;. . ." (Roy Huifman, p. 38). Private water interests are claims,
licenses, permits, holdings, reservations, privileges, or possessory interests.
Water is public domain, the property of the states.4°
   Most private water claims are licenses, at least in the 17 U.S. western
states. Most state constitutions read that the water of a state belongs to the
state (James Huifman, 1993). Of course, it is in trust for the people of the
state. In California it is Water Code Section 102: "All water within the State
                             Water Marketing                             489

is the property of the people of the State         " The 1879 Constitution
declared, "No special privileges or immunities shall ever be granted which
may not be altered, revoked, or repealed by the Legislature,..." (Article
I, Sec 21). In Oregon, "It does not seem to me that water use in this country
ever rose above the dignity of a mere privilege over which the state had
complete control" (Oregon Chief Justice McBride, In re Hood River, 1924,
190—91).
   There is a good deal of paltering on the matter. Lawyers labor studiously
to secure licensees the benefits of owning property without the social ob-
ligations. The bottom line, however, is that a water license has about the
same standing as the privilege some airlines have to occupy certain airport
gates and time slots; the privilege of a cab to work the streets of New York;
a license from the FCC to use a specified frequency; or a grazing permit on
federal lands. It is like the old Oregon and California Railroad land grant
which was revested when the grantee failed to perform. It is subject to
conditions, and to forfeiture for failure to comply with them.
   If water licenses were real property, they would be recorded along with
title deeds to real property—but they are not. Rarely are they on the prop-
erty tax rolls.41 Some water claims, if not excessive, are taxed indirectly
through the value of taxable land the water serves, but unused and misused
water reservations (the problem at hand) do not much raise the value of
any land anywhere, and are not taxed even indirectly.
   Generally, the licensees' dual interest is to make permits seem solid and
"real" property, except when the subject is property taxation, or moving
the place of use—at these points the permits collapse into something else.
The resulting "double-talk" has been deplored (Gaffney, 1962).42
  The legal concept of "appurtenancy" is an example of such double talk.
Water rights are said to be "appurtenant" to the lands they serve, meaning
they disappear into the land and are not listed separately for taxation. How-
ever, when the owner wants to sell water separately from land, appurten-
ancy is no problem (Hutchins, 1956a). Appurtenancy is a pliable term of
art that is used: (1) To give landowners preferential claims on water in
proportion to their acreage; (2) To bolster the standing of water claims
under color of real property; (3) To protect water claims from taxation; and
(4) finally to let surplus water claims be moved around and cashed out.
   The upshot is that the legislature has great latent power. As electors and
citizens, our hands are not tied—just our minds. Most lawyers are on hire
490           American Journal of Economics and Sociology
to represent licensees. A notable few law professors like Professors Harri-
son Dunning and Joseph Sax help let citizens know their latent powers
over water permits (Dunning, 1982a; Sax, 1990; see also Huffman, 1993).
VL3 TheRentof Water
   Water is worth a great deal more than the costs of labor and capital to
divert, store, regulate and distribute it. That is why people fight over it. It
costs $30/acre-foot to deliver the water that Gage Canal shareholders get
from the Santa Ana River in southern California. Meanwhile, the state is
wholesaling imported water just across a survey line for ten times as much.
MWDSC is preparing to reclaim polluted groundwater for more than that.
The prevailing idea of water economy is that pure, sweet water rising nat-
urally in this arid region is only worth what it costs to withdraw it from the
river; at the source it has no value and may be wasted. It makes more sense
to say water at the source has a high value, proven by people's willingness
to spend $300/unit to buy other water just like it.
   The true social cost of withdrawing water is the cost imposed on others
by preempting it from them. It is the same as what the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission today calls "avoided cost," that is, the cost of pro-
viding a substitute for what is taken. The concept of "avoided cost," like
so many good ideas in economics, harks back to Henry George. He wrote
that the value of a thing is not the past labor that went into it, but the future
labor avoided by owning it (Science of Political Economy, p. 249), The
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission has made good use of this concept,
making electric utilities buy co-generated power from independent sellers
at a price equal to "avoided cost."
   That's not the half of avoided cost, however, because state water is heav-
ily subsidized. Its wholesale price of $300 is far below the full cost of bring-
ing it down south. State water comes from the Feather River, 600 miles
north and is pumped over the Tehachapi and San Bernardino Mountains.
Its true social cost, at the margins, is more like $3,000 per acre-foot, give
or take.44 Notice $3,000 is ten times what the state charges for it, and 100
times what the Gage Canal charges for local water.
   A variation on this basic theme is to admit water has value at the source,
but trivialize it by saying it is the historical purchase price, if any. Those
few water holdings that are assessed as taxable property seem to be valued
on this basis (LaBahn). This is like saying Manhattan is worth no more than
the $24 Pieter Minuit once paid for it.
                                Water Marketing                           491

   Santa Ana River water, rising where demand is high and supply short,
yields rent. Rent is a taxable surplus. Tax it, and the state can let people
sell it for an economic price without cheating the general public that really
owns it (Gaffney, 1988).

                                        VII

                         Fundamental Economic Ideas
VII. 1 Entitlements, the Public Trust Doctrine, and Allocation
   Correct economic analysis has to presume or prove something about
who should own water: either a public trust doctrine, or a giveaway doc-
trine.45 "Entitlements"—the initial assignments of property rights—have a
major effect on the relative bargaining power of different parties. For years
economists would ask, say, canoers, what they as individuals would pay
to keep a river wild. They got rather low valuations and duly reported them
as the scientific measure of the value of recreation. This was an effective
defensive strategy for dam builders since the value came Out quite small.
   One day it occurred to some unsung genius to invert that question. Ask
not what canoers would pay for the wild river, but ask instead what is the
maximum amount the power company would have to pay the canoers to
take it away from them.46 The second question presumes that canoers, as
citizens, already own the wild river. In fact, the citizens do own that
wild river.
  In the current lingo, one arguing ex parte the canoers stresses that
canoers' Willingness to Accept Price (WTA) is the relevant dollar value, and
that is higher, perhaps much higher, than their Willingness to Pay Price
(WTP). WTA is also called a "compensation-demanded valuation." In its
basic CERCIA47 legislation in 1980, the U.S. Congress specified it wanted
measurements of WTA, not WTP (Carson & Navarro, 1988, p. 830). Many
pollster-theorists fret that "received theory" has "been unable to explain
     the persistently observed differences between WI'P and WTA mea-
sures" (Cummings et al., 1986 p. 41)48 The problem is that "received the-
ory" was received damaged.
  Pro-privatizing economists dismiss the matter by alleging that WTP =
VFA (Mitchell and Carson, 1981), so initial entitlements do not matter.
They lean on Ronald Coase, perhaps overlooking the qualifications he put
in the fine print in his famous article (Coase, 1960). In this mindset, distri-
492          American Journal of Economics and Sociology
bution does not matter, only resource allocation matters. Then just start the
game of "Free Market" and let the opportunistic exchange of property
rights begin. Everything works out so long as private property rights are
flim and clearly defined. Resources end up allocated to their most valued
uses, no matter who starts the game with all the chips. Why? Because WTP
=
  That is wrong. In fact, distribution dominates allocation. An owner often
says "My home is not for sale. I will not sell at any price, don't call again."
She can take that attitude when she holds the entitlement. Buyers never
say "I will pay any price, call any time." That is, the WTA is often much
higher than the WTP. It must be so, or real estate would be constantly on
the market.
  "Modem" microeconomics, now dominated by Coasians, is a reincar-
nation of the old Manchester School whose members prescribed "free trade
in land" as the solution to all resource problems. The trade they called
"free" was to begin with existing entitlements inherited from centuries of
conquest, corruption, theft, confiscation, negligence, deception, cunning,
and fraud. In this narrow view, exchange launders all. Everything is for
sale; everyone has his price; all values are determined at the margin, and
efficiency inevitably wins out.
  Mitchell and Carson use Coasian concepts in survey research: They poll
people to put a value on environmental damages.51 One review faulted
"the high rate of unusable responses" (Fischhoff, p. 287). Why "unusable"?
Mitchell and Carson throw Out WTA answers when they exceed WFP an-
swers by more than 5 percent (Mitchell and Carson, 1981; Carson and
Mitchell, 1988; see also Mitchell and Carson, 1989, pp. 32—35, p. 22652),
Sometimes over 50 percent of the responses are "invalid." They don't fit
the Coase model; they must be, in Carson/Mitchell's phrases, "methodo-
logical artifacts," or "outliers," or "protest responses," or "aberrations."53
  The native American aborigines are one such aberration, and a stark
object lesson. Some Indian tribes have Treaty Rights to fish. Their WTP for
those rights is minimal, partly because their Ability to Pay is minimal. On
the other hand, they will not sell "at any price": their WTA is sky high.
They may be unreasonable, but that's the point: ownership lets you be as
unreasonable as you please. Call that "revealed preference."54 We notice
mainly when it is someone else, especially someone different.55
  Politics and institutions are involved: Treaty rights are the most valuable
                               Water Marketing                           493

mode of holding property. They enjoy legal supremacy as high as the Con-
stitution itself (Article VT, Section 2), preempting contracts and ordinary
legislation. All those and other important institutional and sociological con-
siderations are outside the "perfect-markets" ambit of Carson and Mitchell.
    American Indians are an extreme case, but most of us have a streak of
their psychology. Not many generations back we shared the same kind of
culture, a dependence on traditional family lands we held in common, in
implied trust for our descendants. These traditions are still part of the cul-
tural subconscious, and affect current attitudes. They are disregarded in
mechanistic micro modeling in the modem style (except perhaps as tau-
tological "revealed preferences").56
   Distribution dominates allocation. Economists who belittle the question
of entitlements deserve the paranoia57 they evoke in environmentalists. The
proper answer to them is, "If entitlement doesn't matter, give it all to me:
Then let's talk and trade."58 Most of them want to give it, fully laundered,
to whatever private party has a license now. This is another version of the
doctrine "might makes right."
VII.2 Rent-seeking Perverts the Market
   Scarce waters, where demand exceeds supply, yield rent. With demand
growing, even abundant waters, where demand is now low, are expected
to become scarce and yield future rents. Waters currently rentable are ex-
pected to yield still higher rents. In anticipation, persons and organizations
with an eye to future rents are ready to do what is needed today to lay
claim to future waters.
   "What is needed today," by case law, is to divert water and put it to
"beneficial use." This is the prevailing appropriative doctrine of water law,
under which no one pays a state to take its water, now or in the future.
Rather, one acquires a permit that ripens into something resembling per-
petual ownership, by the very process of taking. In practice, "beneficial
use" is a token, an economic bad joke. Private taking is the essence of what
is happening. Local water boosters call this "foresight," and hail it as a
cardinal virtue.
   This appropriative doctrine is the locus classicus of "rent-seeking," i.e.,
distorting present investment to secure future rents. The motive is to divert,
develop, and half-use water before its economic time to lay claim to its
future.
   The concept of prescriptive rights is even more perverse. Here, own-
494           American Journal of Economics and Sociology

ership is established essentially by adverse use, that is, interfering with
someone else's use. The taker's beneficial use becomes even more inci-
dental. In 1949 the California Supreme Court triggered a "race to the pump
house" (Krieger and Banks, 1962) when it proclaimed the doctrine of
"mutual prescription" for groundwater basins (City of Pasadena v. City
ofAlbambra, 1949). This "encouraged defensive ground water overdraft-
ing by pumpers in other basins who anticipated ground water adjudica-
tion" (Gleason, 709).
   Modem privatizers tell us to firm up property rights. Accepting existing
entitlements is their first step; then, and only then, will the market work its
magic. They glide too easily over the process of firming up. They offer no
process but giveaways to privatize resources.5? Yet, claims to water are
constantly being made, expanded, and firmed up, and any giveaway pro-
cess violates the virtues a market is supposed to possess. Indeed, giveaway
is the essential precondition for "rent-seeking" behavior which, in most
other realms, economists deplore (Krueger, 1971). The rule for prior ap-
propriators and adverse possessors is particularly counterproductive:
"Waste today, want not tomorrow."6°
   As we segue toward a market system we see a gray area between older,
stationary water licenses and the coming new, portable ones. A class of
speculators is moving in to acquire permits from present holders who still
value them in their fixed, traditional places and uses. The speculators vi-
sualize commercializing the water for distant growing cities or industries,
using their political influence to secure needed rights-of-way, and litiga-
tion/legislation to modify the water permits to make them more tradable.
Some publicized examples are PG&E Properties in northem Califomia, Pe-
ter Hensen and John Huston near Denver, BCE (Bell Canada), Cadiz Land
in Riverside County, Tenneco in Kern County, a few major oil firms, the
Maurice Strong consortium in New Mexico, and the Bass Brothers in the
Imperial Valley (Fulton, 1996; Gaffney, 1997).
   This is a new modified, more sophisticated form of rent-seeking, blended
with old-fashioned land speculation.61 It is raising great anxiety and re-
sentment among environmentalists, egalitarians, and other concerned cit-
izens (Gottlieb, 1988, pp. 261—80). It causes many to reject the idea of water
marketing, saying "A water market just means a plague of speculators."
Ownership of irrigated land is already more concentrated than ownership
of other land (Gaffney, 1992a). Wealthy buyers like Sid and Lee Bass, oil
                              Water Marketing                             495
billionaires from Fort Worth, quickly amassing 45,000 acres in the Imperial
Valley, make it more so.
   There is a better way. A policy of taxing water withdrawals, based on
the full opportunity cost of water, will do the job without giving away the
benefits that belong to the public to private usurpers (Gaffney 1992b). That
does mean our own governments must take an interventionist hand and
assess the market value of water, probably using existing county assessors.
It's that or the absentee speculators. Thus far the choice has gone to the
speculators; the results are neither just nor efficient.

                                     VIII

            Bureaucracy, Private Property, and Water Markets
VIH.1
The Misleading Devil Theo?y of Bureaucracy and Angel Theory of Private Property
  It's easy, too easy in today's Zeitgeist, to demonize government "bureau-
crats" and beautify private property and markets. "Bureaucracy" is a ster-
eotype. To be fair, let's look at the other side.
   Irrigation Districts along the Friant-Kern Canal were selling surplus Fed-
eral water in the 1950s, with federal blessing (Maass, 1952). Water filings
by the feds were granted by the State not to certain lands, but "for the use
and benefit of said Central Valley Project," to further a "general or coor-
dinated plan         (California Farm Bureau, pp. 58, 60). The U.S. Supreme
Court upheld the mobility of these filings decisively in 1958 (Ivanhoe v.
McCracken).62 Such pooling and banking was inherent in the ambitious
Marshall Plan, the comprehensive statewide plan of the 1920s that devolved
into the present Central Valley Project.
   Who opposed these market-oriented proposals? Big landowner lobbies
pushed for undisseverable attachment of specffic waters to specific lands.
Apart from acreage limitations, "the principal public attack . . . has been
focused on the employment of the so-called 9(e) (non-appurtenant) form
of contract        (Graham, 172; Crampton, 99)63 "Appurtenancy" was their
slogan.64 The big landowners' concern has been with the distribution of
water rights, not their efficient allocation.65 They advanced "a moral claim
to water in proportion to their landholdings,. . . "(Taylor, 1955, p. 478).
   When Federal bureaucrats tried to create a flexible market in water, it
was "Communism," "fellow-traveling," and the baleful influence of Henry
496           American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Wallace andJames Roosevelt (Downey, pp. 30,40,41, 49, 167). A California
trial judge ruled that the BR was "Marxian" (Albonico v. Madera I.D., 1951,
p. 10, cit. Graham p. 74, n. 236). "What partisan motives, what ideology,
what pathological processes, what mysterious political influence       was
at work (Downey, p. 49)? Thus did private property greet the idea of water
marketing.
   An ancillary policy, acreage limitation, also offended big landowners.
It is not clear which issue aroused them more, but the two together made
the Federal Government, which had been invited to subsidize their water
supply, their target (Cooper, pp. 154_66).67 BR personnel were "Commu-
nists," supported by the Daily People's World (Worster, p. 251, 254; Dow-
ney, p. 41; Kirkendall, 1964, pp. 200—01). Efforts to pool waters and inte-
grate the system are ". . . a careful, fully conscious and deliberately
planned attempt to bring about in the U.S. the same kind of collectivization
they have in Russia" (Kings River Water Association, 1950, p. 15). Covering
all bases, they add ". . . Fascism is exactly what we will get" (op cit, p.
19). Trading on the anti-Federalist pathos helped people forget that full
integration of all Sierra rivers was the essence of the California Marshall
Plan of the conservative 1920s, approved by the State Legislature.69
   U.S. Senator Sheridan Downey was the landowners' leading spokesman.
Here is what he demanded in 1947. ". . . that the land and water should
be joined together, never to be cut asunder that the farmers should enjoy
in perpetuity the use of the water. . ; that when the land is sold, the right
to water shall also be sold with it, and that neither should be sold separately'
(Downey, 1947, pp. 226—27, emphasis supplied).
  An allied writer found "the clue to the bureau's arbitrary and seemingly
stupid actions" was its hidden agenda to transfer water to cities. "Sober
Californians, however, realize that agriculture is the basis of the state's
wealth, and that it must not be jeopardized" (Crampton, 102). In its 1957
Ivanhoe decision (later reversed by the United States Supreme Court, in
1958) the California Supreme Court covered unappropriated waters with a
right based on landownership, that is, a new right modeled on the riparian
law making water "part and parcel" of the land to which applied (Taylor
1957 p. 83).
   An earlier spokesman for private property rights, Mr. Henry Miller, the
riparian, had successfully demanded that waters be made "part and parcel"
of his riparian lands, letting him monopolize most of the San Joaquin River
                               Water Ma rketing                           497

(Lux v. Haggin, 1886). Just so again, today's landowners want and get farm
price supports, preferential tax exemptions, export subsidies, protection
against foreign sugar, control of the cow colleges, and subsidized water.7°
By now we should have gotten the picture: Private property is a distribu-
tive, not an allocative arrangement. The owners want their unearned in-
crements first. Then maybe later a little, free competition will do, carefully
measured out when it adds to their rents, otherwise not.71
   Further to frustrate flexible water marketing, Sheridan Downey and the
landowners invoked the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the historical ve-
hicle for "rivers and Harbors" pork-barrel appropriations. The Flood Con-
trol Act of 1944 turned over to them several key rivers: The Kings', Kaweah,
Tule, and Kern, their flows never to be integrated with the San Joaquin or
each other (Morgan, pp. 70, 404; Kahrl, 1978, p. 50; Maass 1951, pp. 215—
59; Gaffney, 1960; Cooper, p. 158). Arthur Maass and Arthur Morgan de-
scribe this as "an enormous financial grab."72 President Franklin D. Roo-
sevelt complained "of the desire of certain large land interests in California
to obtain irrigation and other benefits without being subjected to the re-
payment requirements          (Maass, 1951, p. 235). Contrary to the cliche,
allocative efficiency was sacrificed for distributive inequity and pilfering.73
   The Kings River Water Association made 15 demands on the BR in 1946.
One demand was that "all Kings River water remain within the presently
irrigated area." Another demand was that the Kings River remain a separate
entity from the Central Valley Project (Kaupke, 1957, p. 51). In 1956, ac-
cording to Wahi, they secured permanent rights to federal project water
"within the boundaries of the contractors' district" (Wahl, p. 175). In 1979
they were still fighting the BR and their neighbors—going to great lengths
to distance themselves from the neighboring Westlands Water District
(Leake and Barnes, pp. 19—20). Rigid Balkanization was identified with
private property rights.
   Traducement anticipates persecution The lobbies played hardball. The
Bureau of Agricultural Economics (BAE) was singled out for attack in
Budget Hearings for 1946—47. Its offense was to shelter Mr. Marion Claw-
son, Ms. Mary Montgomery, Mr. Edwin Wilson and Dr. Walter Goldschmidt
in its Berkeley office. They had supported the BR by conducting landown-
ership surveys and planning studies of the project area, and reporting on
the unequal distribution of land to receive project waters (Worster, pp. 245—
49). "The upshot of this. . was that Congress made deep cuts in the BAE
                           .
498          American Journal of Economics and Sociology

budget.    . With budget cuts resulting from their objectionable work they
(Marion Clawson and Mary Montgomery) were dropped by BAE, as was
natural" (Downey, p. 52). Goldschmidt and Wilson were also "separated
from the Bureau" at this time (Downey, p. 256; for Clawson's perspective,
v. Clawson, 1987, pp. 150—60; for more on Goldschmidt, see Taylor, 1976).
   It was the McCarthy era style politics. State Senator Jack Tenney ran an
inquisition in Sacramento.74 The University made its professors sign a loy-
alty oath. Senator Downey published long ad hominem attacks on Mr.
Richard Boke, Bureau Chief in Sacramento, and caused his salary to be
suspended for nine months, a virtual Bill of Attainder that was revoked
only upon the surprise election of Harry Truman in 1948 (Taylor, Vol. II,
p. 193). Mr. George Sokolsky and Mr. Fulton Lewis, Jr., inflammatory col-
umnists, joined the pack in full cry (Kirkendall, 1966, pp. 223—25). The BAE
was never forgiven and "disappeared" in 1953. Heads rolled, careers were
broken or made, survivors cowed.
   Even Clawson, a strong man who survived and prospered, became cau-
tious and cynical. Reviewing the matter, he wrote retrospectively that he
learned this lesson: "Follow not too closely at the heels of truth, lest she
kick your teeth in" (Clawson, 1987, p. 160). Donald Worster sees young
Clawson as a "devoted New Deal liberal" (Worster, p. 245). Sober-sided,
scholarly Richard Kirkendall, reviewing Clawson's correspondence in the
National Archives, described him as having been "passionately involved"
(Kirkendall, 1964, p. 206). Clawson's later career has been productive and
creative, but "passionately involved" he has not been. According to Wors-
ter, he had "surrendered" as early as 1944 (Worster, p. 253), although that
did not stay the persecution.75 He never again touched the region or
the issue.76
   Goldschmidt, too, has prospered, even within the University of California
system. He adapted, however, by transferring his studies to Africa, far from
the AES and its turf. From the grave, Sheridan Downey78 inhibited his
survivors.The treatment of Wells Hutchins was friendlier. Hutchins wrote
U. S. Department of Agriculture and AES bulletins about the sanctity of
property rights in water. The waterlords found these materials useful.
"State's Rights" was their theme, and they needed legalistic writings from
a reliable source. After Hutchins reached 65, The California Water Council
and the National Reclamation Association asked Secretary Ezra Taft Benson
to keep Hutchins on a "retired annuitant" basis, which Benson did (Western
                              Water Marketing                              499
 Water News, February 1958, p. 1) Hutchins was kept on the USDA payroll
17 more years until his death in 1970, aged 82. It took seven more years
for two other writers to complete his Water Right Laws in the 19 Western
States. The handsome, expensive publication of these three volumes
breathes endorsement, legitimacy, and approval. In contrast, Wilson and
Clawson's classic BAE study of landownership concentration is cheaply
mimeographed, barely legible, and hard to find;79 Goldschmidt's classic
study was suppressed and had to be published privately.
  If you want to credit private property with supporting free markets and
fair play in water, land, outputs, ideas, or promotions and retirements,
pause and review this object lesson. Theodore Schultz wrote of it, "To
understand the vulnerability of the BAE one has to appreciate the profound
unfriendliness which these organized political forces. . . feel for agricul-
tural economics research that does not provide the 'right' answers."
(Schultz, 1954, p. 19.) Schultz had been there, having been bounced from
Iowa State University for a study finding oleo as good as butter. Now he is
a Nobel Laureate.
   Many bureaucrats are fallen angels, granted, but we have to ask "who
pushed them." "Government" water agencies become private agencies
masquerading as public ones. They enjoy government powers and im-
munities but carry water for the private landed establishment. This in turn
harks back to the original distribution of land ownership, when politicians
corruptly distributed public lands to favored private parties. Just as distri-
bution dominates allocation, it also dominates politics. Subsequent laws
are twisted in application by the political weight of the original beneficiaries
and their successors interlocked in power at the apex of the pyramid.8°
They get away with it because the original land grab gives leverage and
power to get more, and most people go along to get along, some weakly
and meekly, some apologetically,81 some avariciously seeking their private
cut. Only a few stand out for the public interest, and they are systematically
traduced.
   More recently, in 1978 both the RAND Corporation and the Governor's
Conirnission to Review Water Rights Law proposed a few mild and politic
controls on waste, and facilitating transfers. Senator Nejedly's proposals in
SB 1361 were so mild that even DWR supported them, "but the powerful
agricultural and land development interests"—Private Property—blocked
legislation to implement them (Dennis, p. 60).
500           American Journal of Economics and Sociology
VIII.2 Water Districts as Pocket Boroughs
  The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWDSC) is run
by a board of 50 directors representing 27 cities and districts that it serves.
These directors are not elected but appointed, resulting in an old-boys'
club where some directors sit for more than 30 years. Business is conducted
by committees; seniority is a ruling factor. "Not a single member of your
board is elected by the people, yet you collectively assert the right to pass
on statewide policy" (Governor Pat Brown to MWD Board, 1960). Half the
directors are developers or landowners; others own engineering or con-
struction firms, or banks that lend to them (Dennis, p. 128).
   As for the elected officials who appoint the directors, those from cities
are elected on the basis of "one-person-one-vote"—well and good. How-
ever, those from several outlying districts are elected by a land-based fran-
chise: one-dollar one-vote. Here is the heart of antidemocracy. Sacramento
has delegated the people's sovereign powers to these landowner controlled
districts.82 Control may be completely nonresident. Representatives from
landowner-owned districts remain the same from election to election, gain-
ing seniority to dominate the 50-person Board and its ruling committees
(GoothIl et al., 1978, pp. 97—98. Bradley and Morales, 1981.) "At times the
control of public government— in this case the water district—by private
organizations may be complete." (Goodall, et al., p. 98. Hall et al., Stipu-
lation, p. 7.)
  Thus a handful of speculative landowners, some living in other countries,
have as many votes as millions of city residents. Accordingly, MWDSC
preaches water conservation to the guilt-ridden middle classes in the cities
while it continues to annex new speculations and serve new developments
with artificial lakes and golf courses. They plunge ahead, heedless of five
years of drought and their own water-conservation jawboning. MWDSC's
former chair, the one who frets that some voters just "do not understand,"
was appointed a director of MWDSC by the board of the Western Municipal
Water District of Riverside County, an area dominated by thirsty land spec-
ulators.83 Many economists have criticized MWD's persistent refusal to con-
sider any kind of economically rational, cost-justified rate stmcture.
  To give a notion of how this works, consider the Newhall Land Partner-
ship. It holds 123,000 acres, mainly in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties,
from Valencia and Magic Mountain west down the Santa Clara Valley of
the south toward Piru and Fillmore. The Newhall family controls the public
                               Water Marketing                              501

partnership, with 40 percent of the shares [L.A. Times, 3—86, 8—87]. The
Newhalls are developing the city of Valencia, but slowly: 7,000 of its 10,000
acres remain undeveloped.
  The Newhalls were early, major financial backers of the political cam-
paigns for the 1982 Peripheral Canal bond issue to bring more northern
water south.85 MWDSC was the front. The Newhalls also work through the
Castaic Lake Water Agency which is a major lobbyist and, some believe,
their own fiefdom (Gaffney, 1997). The purpose of this proposed project
was to valorize speculative landholdings on the fringe of the southern meg-
alopolis. They joined in this campaign with other large development inter-
ests: the Irvine Company, Southern California Edison, Security Pacific Bank,
Rockwell, Mission Viejo (the O'Neills), Bixby Ranch, and Union Oil [L.A.
Times, 1—80]. Yeager Construction Co. (highways and landholdings) led
the campaign in Riverside County.
   MWDSC solicitude for speculative landowners does not stop at its
boundaries. It has a history of releasing a large part of its entitlements in
California Aqueduct water to a few water districts in Kern County! It has
gone along from the start with pricing policies egregiously unfavorable to
its own people to subsidize the Kern County Water Agency (Storper and
Walker, 1984). This agency serves lands straddling 1-5, owned by a few
major oil companies in which MWDSC Directors have signfficant interests.87
Another huge owner is the Chandler family, whose interests include the
Los Angeles Times, and the vast Tejon Ranch and (part of the) J.G. Boswell
landholdings of the southern and western San Joaquin Valley (Gottlieb and
Wolt, pp. 500—509; Villarejo, 1981, pp. 3—10). The Times spearheaded the
Peripheral Canal campaign.89
  All that is not to disparage the MWDSC ideal. It's the practice that is faulty,
and the problem is the same as with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation: land-
owner domination of what should be a democratic institution. The reme-
dies are the same as those advanced by Progressives like Hiram Johnson
(R) and Woodrow Wilson (D): democratic control with professional lead-
ership.
   That seems so long ago as to be irrelevant, but don't despair. What de-
stroyed Progressivism was The Cold War, which really began in 1919 with
The Palmer Raids and is only now just ending. This seems a good time to
pick up where The Progressives left off. The old bones are stirring. Merrill
Goodall's studies have analyzed the problem. The Center for Law in the
502             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Public Interest, representing the disenfranchised citizens of Irvine, won its
1979 case forcing reform of voting in the Irvine Ranch Water District, It's a
matter of marshaling a few troops to win the battles of democracy. As
Clarence Darrow said, "Authority is nothing more than what the rich and
powerful can put over on the rest of us." It is not to despair that we must
turn; rather, let us learn the right lesson for future guidance. Do not look
to big landowners to give us free markets. The white hats were a handful
of idealistic populist battlers who persevered against ridicule, libel, indif-
ference, the press, the landed/monied establishment, and daunting odds.
We have always suspected democracy depends on such die-hards; "New
Resource Economists" and other water marketeers need to learn free mar-
kets depend on them, too.

                                          Notes
  1. Nancy Moore now speaks for RAND Corporation. She is partial to the pink-slip
metaphor. She and her former co-author Charles Phelps, in telephone interviews, are
more temperate in their claims and open to dialogue. However, their basic monograph
(Phelps et al., 1978) seems based on a "hard-line" Chicago-Rochester doctrine. It contains
no distributive philosophy other than converting conditional tenures into absolute
property.
   2. AB 3491. The statute lets water districts act as brokers for individuals, and mandates
state agencies to encourage and provide technical help. The State Department of Water
Resources has set up a Water Transfers Committee to do so.
   3. AB 2746. See Saliba and Bush, 1987, p. 178.
   4. Other examples might be sheep in sixteenth century England during the first enclo-
sure movement, and wheat during the second. Timber replacing small farmers in the
Appalachians is another example. Cheap energy has sometimes helped giant farm ma-
chines displace workers, and often lower yields.
   5. This is a shift from the dream of "Water, Wealth, Contentment and Health" that was
promised and delivered to the people of Modesto from 1887 to 1950 or so, when they
were struggling and paying to develop their waters. Modesto today is prosperous and
secure—but a third member of the ten highest-welfare cities.
   Modesto has delivered water without variable charge from an early date. However, in
its earlier days it levied steep land assessments to pay for ambitious dams and canal
systems. It was these that kept the landowners hopping. Now the bonds are retired, land
yields a surplus that attracts absentee buyers with a lesser propensity to husband land
intensively.
   6. Such common sense is obscured by the clumsy apparatus of 'production possibility
curves" and "frontiers" that micro-economists stylize their thinking with today; ditto for
"Cobb-Douglas functions." Wearing those blinders, economists generally presume that
higher input prices must lead to lower output. However, it is a three-factor world. The
                                    Water Marketing                                      503
"product" of cheap water to many farmers is not the increase of yields, but the drop of
costs other than water.
   7. Such a tax has been proposed by White, p. 5; Boulding, p. 91; Brewer, pp. 240—42;
Young and Martin; Young, Daubert, and Morel-Seytoux; Billings; Gaffney 1969, 1973,
1977, 1988; and indirectly, by van Schulfgaarde, p. 114. It is possible but not confirmed
that it was also proposed by RAND Corporation, cit. Dennis, p. 79. Possibly there was
division among the many RAND people putting out studies. Phelps et al., p.17, seem
negative, because the "tax would heavily redistribute wealth away from current water
users" ... and so "is likely to meet heavy political opposition             That is an oddly
non-efficiency reason to bear weight in a study otherwise exclusively concerned with
and entitled Efficient Water Use, but it serves them to dismiss the matter.
   8. Colorado applies such a tax along the S. Platte River, calling it an "augmentation
charge." The approach "has operated for several years, . . . with little problem or con-
troversy" (Young, Daubert and Morel-Seytoux, p. 790).
   9. For $180/year one can keep current with Water Market Update, Santa Fe.
   10. It now seems likely that Imperial Irrigation District will transfer a small part of its
large surplus to MWD. This deal has been in the making for some 40 years, and should
probably not be attributed to recent legislation, according to Myron Holburt, representing
MWD. The "deal" was made in 1989, but no water is expected actually to be shifted until,
(and who knows what glitches await) (Warren, 1991a). The amount proposed for transfer,
100,000 a.f., is only about 3 percent of the nearly 4 m.a.f. taken by irrigators on the lower
Colorado, California side—more than a token, but just barely.
   11. I refer here to emergency or "spot market" water. As to permanent supplies, they
themselves have avoided acquiring them, to stifle unwanted growth. In Santa Barbara in
1989 there was a six-year line-up for water for detached homes; twelve years for multiple
units (Evans, p. 2).
   12. This support is found on its Editorial page, June 5 and July 3, 1991.
   13. Water districts have prospered by serving compact blocks of land, thus minimizing
conveyance costs (Gaffney, 1969). Forced inclusion of lands in the service perimeter is
at the heart of Irrigation District history, economy, and success.
   14. Procedures for severing water from specific lands are still so clumsy and uncertain
that MWD plans to rely mainly on buying lands outright and idling them, to get their
waters (Warren, 1991). This extreme "meat-axel' procedure dates back to 1907: it is how
Los Angeles got its Owens Valley waters (Kahrl, 1982; Ostrom). Coupled with Katz's latest
bill, it could seriously inflate distribution costs in rural districts.
   15. This occurred in the Senate Agriculture and Water Committee (one hopes for the
right reasons) in mid-August, 1991 (L.A. Times, 26 August 91).
   16. For a long bibliography see Graham, p. 172, n. 440.
   17. Marshall was a former Colonel in the Engineer Corps who had retired to promote
his dream as a private California citizen (Kahrl, 1978, p. 51). For a less rosy view of
Marshall, and a discussion of Spreckels, see Angel, 1944, 60—67.
   18. Later yet, in 1959 California revived utility-type contracts in the Burns-Porter Act
and the State Water Plan (Graham, 184—88), coming full circle. The State's position has
not been marked by philosophical consistency.
504            American Journal of Economics and Sociology
   19. In this the Feds were much less radical than the home-grown Marshall Plan, in
which the Kings River was fully integrated in 1927 (Jopson and Giannelli, Plate 2). The
State Water Code, Section 105, says ". . . the State shall determine in what way the water
of the State, both surface and underground, should be developed for the greatest benefit"
(op. cit., p. 1).
   20. A common misuse of theory is the notion that people react to opportunity cost as
promptly as they do to cash costs because that is what "rational" people "should" do.
This belief is a severe case of doctrine overriding observation.
   21. The point was raised by Gaffney, 1961, pp. 38—40, who called it the "heirloom
attitude"; attacked in Trelease, 1961, who called the reasoning "subliminal"; and defended
in Gaffney, 1962. The point is also observed by Phelps et al. 1978, p. 28.
   22. A water license is not real property, but a privilege. Privileges are less protectable
than property. Recall that Congress passed a corporation income tax in 1909 as a license
fee for the privilege of doing business as a corporation. Congress did this at a time before
the 16th Amendment when it could not (practically) tax the income from property. On
such nice wordplay do mighty issues turn.
   California's tax limit applies only to "real property." This raises the interesting possi-
bility that a tax based on water licenses—privileges—would be exempt from California's
tax limit. Where there's a will there's a legal way (Gaffney, 1988).
   Another possibility is levying a special benefit assessment on lands with special access
to waters. A California court has ruled that benefit assessments are not taxes and therefore
not limited by Proposition 13 (American River Flood Control District v. Board of Super-
visors, Sacramento County, 130 Cal Ap. 3d 707, 1982. Also, County of Fresno v. Malstrom,
94 Cal. App. 3rd, 974, 1979).
   23. The episode was dramatized in the film Chinatown, although key names like Mul-
holland, Van Nuys, Sherman, Huntington, Otis, and Chandler are occidental.
   24. "I weep for you," the Walrus said; "I deeply sympathize. With sobs and tears he
sorted Out those of the largest size, holding his pocket handkerchief before his streaming
eyes. "—Lewis Carroll
   25. Seeking to avoid the treadmill effect in Arizona, the Carter Administration required
the state to control farm overdraft as the pnce for the subsidized Central Arizona Project.
In result, Arizona water is being urbanized much faster than California water (Peterson,
1986). Earlier, pioneer water economists Robert Young and William Martin had been
traduced and penalized at The University of Arizona for recommending the same thing.
They did not have Federal billions behind them (Young and Martin, 1967).
   26. Power companies, of course, are the greatest consumers of elevation. The tax on
water "withdrawals" proposed herein would include a tax on power drops (British Co-
lumbia has long raised revenues from such a tax). It has often been alleged that power
companies used "pigmy dams" to preempt power drops while undenitilizing them (Leg-
islative Analyst, 1947, p. 8). If so, the proposed tax, based on putative full development,
would prompt such development.
   27. Consolidated People's Ditch Co. v. Foothill Ditch Co., 1928, cit. Gaffney, 1961.
Elevation of water has great value, even if not used to generate power, because it is used
to move water hundreds of miles, by gravity.
                                   Water Marketing                                    505
  28. Heaping irony upon manure, these malodorous piles in an urban area result from
preferential low assessment of farmland, to enhance the environment.
  29. These authors, under color of technical analysis, actually base their findings on the
political premise that no pump tax should be considered unless the result is to raise
overlying farm land rents and prices. Their model is tailored to the west side of Kern
County, California, province of a few giant landowners whose political power and militant
opposition to metering water use are well known.
   30. The small charges cover expenses of the Gage Canal Co., which delivers in the
cheapest old-fashioned way, by gravity, in rotation with other users. The Canal Co. pays
nothing at the source for water as such.
   31. Apologies to etymological purists for combining a Greek with a Latin root.
   32. There is no need to embarrass the author, long retired, by naming him or her.
   33. The good instinct behind the writeis point was that access to fisheries needs to
be limited or otherwise better managed. That much of the work is valid.
   34. Wahl is silent on the standing of those who have been getting water for excess
lands in violation of federal law. His clear implication, however, is in their favor on all
points. This is no small matter. For example, Southern Pacific Land Co. owns 81,200 acres
in the Westlands Water District alone (Villarejo and Redmond, p. 46). Boswell has 24,000
acres. Both have larger holdings elsewhere getting more subsidized water.
   35. Compounding the offense, Wahl wrote this at exactly the time that 40-year con-
tracts on CVP waters were expiring and up for review. The whole point of those contracts,
and the strife in 1948 on, and the Ivanhoe decision, was that subsidies were not to be
perpetual. Congress has waffled since then, but there is no need to encourage them.
   36. This is the main policy pushed in the otherwise scholarly and useful study of Wahl,
1989. He premises it on pp. 3, 5, repeats the point several times, and concludes with it
onp. 295.
  37. The plot thickens when we consider that ground storage is a traditional route
whereby small users cross-subsidize large ones (Fellmeth, 1973, 168; Teitz and Walker,
59—67). This is because overlying landowners have pumping rights proportional to their
acreage.
   38. Severance taxes, property taxes, and gains taxes need to be combined optimally.
We leave the details moot here.
   39. U.S. Senator Bill Bradley promoted a bill in 1991 that would include a gains tax of
25 percent on transfers (Ellis, 1991a).
   40. There are issues among states, and between states and the United States. Here we
confine our attention to one state.
   41. There are exceptions, too trivial to pursue here. The legal ambiguity is betrayed
when some licenses are taxed as personal, others as real property.
   42. Wells Hutchins authored a pamphlet on water law for California farmers in which
boldface headings read "Water Rights Are Real Estate." These headings were apparently
added by someone else; Hutchins' text says no such thing (Hutchins, 1956b). His full-
dress book of the same year states that the 1928 Amendment to the California Constitution
limits water claims previously considered property, and these limits "apply to the use of
506             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
all water under whatever right           (Hutchins, 1956a, p. 19). ". . . the (new) appropri-
ator may take the surplus without giving compensation" (op. cit., p. 18). Those are not
attributes of property.
   43. The peroration of Sax's scholarly, documented treatise is quite stirring, as though
inspired by Moses, Tolstoy, and Henry George.
   44. No one ever could figure it out to the dollar, so cooked are the books. A major
effort was made by Alan Post, 1982; a minor one by Mason Gaffney, 1982.
   45. In Ivanhoe the USSC rejected the doctrine that the state holds water in trust spe-
cifically for excess landowners, opining instead that "The project was designed to benefit
people, not land" (357 U.S. 296). In Sporhase (458 U.S. 941 [19821) it rejected the use of
trust doctrine to stop interstate transfers. I do not presume to enter the technical side of
the law of trusts, but neither decision seems to have inhibited the flowering in the 1980s
of the public trust doctrine to protect instream uses. In all three instances, the courts seem
to be sorting things out as well as I could ask.
   46. The point is made in Herfindahl and Kneese, 1965, rpt. 1974, p. 287.
   47. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act.
   48. Hanemann (1991) uses "received theory" to refute Carson/Mitchell et al.
   49. In the 1981 work they find the difference is only 1%. They cite this approvingly,
1989, pp. 32—33.
   50. For a flagrant example of the genre see WahI, p. 130. Economists today are trained
to toss this off without thinking and even come to believe it themselves.
   51. It's called the "contingent valuation method," or CV, because the questions are
hypothetical.
   52. Mitchell and Carson are a challenge to decipher. The "fine print" is scattered. It
comes down to this, however. High-valued answers to VFA questions are an "artifact,"
and not "meaningful." "[VFP] and [WTAI should be within 5 percent of each other.
(pp. 22—23, emphasis supplied). To say "I want an extremely large... amount of com-
pensation for agreeing to this" is a "protest answer," and they trash it. 50 percent or more
of all answers are often such "protest" answers. These answers are "outliers" (p. 34).
They remove "outliers" either outright or by using statistical devices that have the effect
of discounting them (p. 226). See Mitchell and Carson, 1989.
   53. The case is something like that of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center and why
they missed detecting the ozone hole before Farman found it in 1985. "Their instruments
had recorded the losses (of ozone), but the computer interpreting the results had been
programmed to ignore readings that deviated so far from normal" (BW, 22 July 91, p. 10).
   54. Status-quo theory is shaken to the foundation by survey findings that VfAWFP.
Its criterion for acceptable policy changes is based on Pareto's and Edgeworth's notion
that you mustn't deprive one rich landowner, even to help a thousand starving orphans,
because you can't compare their subjective feelings. When, however, we acknowledge
common birthrights to a clean environment, the shoe is on the other foot. Now you can't
pollute anyone's air or water because the victims own it. They can be as unreasonable
as any great landlord. This explains the busy-ness of theorists seeking to plug the dike.
   55. Another large group to consider are the rural Hispanics of the southwest, who put
                                   Water Marketing                                    507
a high value on preserving their communities. A survey in Taos and Quests, N.M., found
80.6 percent were "Opposed and don't want to sell." Only 6.1 percent answered yes to
"Would sell if price is right" (Brown and Ingram, p. 79). We are talking here about very
poor people and very expensive water.
  56. It was 1974 when a survey first showed WTAVFP, "in contradiction to received
theory (i.e., Coase)." This sent dozens of professors scunying to torture the data until it
confessed otherwise and saved Coase. Mitchell and Carson slog through a long literature
survey, apparently impartially, but in the end find ways to stick with WTP after all (1989,
pp. 37—38).
  57. Some paranoia may be in order. According to Carson and Navarro (p. 830), Con-
gress wanted measurements of VIA for CERCLA, but the USD1. overrode Congress and
used VIP because of the "admitted difficulty by economists of measuring WFA.
That seems to say that economic consultants overrode the Congress of the United States
by snowing them with technicalities!
   58. That cuts at the root of the Pareto concept that is used as a bulwark against chal-
lenges to concentrated private property. According to Pareto, nothing may be changed
if anyone is injured, unless that person be compensated. Only win-win changes are
allowed, beginning from the status quo. The influence of rent-takers has worked this idea
into the center of economic theory.
   59. Vernon Smith wants to give away "water deeds" based on histories of pumping;
Terry Anderson wants to give them away in proportion to land ownership (Terry Ander-
son, 1983b, pp. 101—02). The idea of firming up titles by actually charging for them
seems taboo.
   60. ". . . farmers or cities first divert and use water by crude systems. Conservation
measures often are delayed until the pinch is on" (Patterson, 1991). In 1962, The Orange
County Water District sued every upstream diverter on the Santa Aria. In the 1969 judge-
ment, "each water agency's allotment is based on historical use" (Patterson, 1991). With
that in mind, Riverside Mayor Davison boasted that "Riverside's water use doubled during
my term of office" (1941—48). He deemed it an achievement. It reminds one of the uni-
versity chancellor who boasted his greatest achievement was creating four new vice-
chancellorships and several associate deanships.
   61. This writer believes plain old-fashioned land speculation is an example of market
failure. Some others see it as a wholesome, functional, integral part of the market. The
writer's position on this is in the following. "Tax Reform to Release Land." In Marion
Clawson (ed.), Modernizing Urban Land Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1973,
pp. 115—52. "Land and Rent in Welfare Economics." In Marion Clawson, Marshall Harriss
and Joseph Ackerman (eds) Land Economics Research. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1962, pp. 151—67. "The Unwieldy Time-dimension of Space." AJES 20(5)
:465—8 1. October 1961. "Land Rent, Taxation and Public Policy." Papers of the Regional
Science Association Volume 23, 1970, pp. 141—53. "Privatizing Land without Giveaway."
Conference of Social Collection of Rent in the Soviet Union, August 1990, pp. 1—58 (pub-
lished in Russian by Ekograd, St. Petersburg, 1995). "Economic Aspects of Water Resource
Policy." AJE28(2) :131—44 (April, 1969). "Ground Rent and the Allocation of Land among
508             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Firms." In Frank Miller (ed.) Rent Theory, Problems and Practices. North Central Regional
Research Bulletin 139 (University of Missouri Research Bulletin 810). Pp. 30—49; 74—82.
"Land as a Distinctive Factor of Production." In Tideman, Nicolaus (ed.), Land and Tax-
ation. London: Shepheard-Walwyn, 1995.
   62. In 1958 the U.S. Supreme Court, under California's former Governor Earl Warren
(R), stunningly reversed the trial and appellate courts and a divided California Supreme
Court, when it unanimously ruled that the BR held water in its own right, not in trust for
landowners of the contracting districts. If there were any implied or constructive trust, it
was on another principle: "The project was designed to benefit people, not land" (Ivan-
hoe v. McCracken, 357 US. 275, 1958, 296—97). The 9(e) contracts were valid (op cit,
299—300).
   Thanks to that decision it is possible to market federal water today (Graham, 172—90).
The California Supreme Court, shot down, had to admit their misuse of the trust doctrine.
     was established that the title of the U.S. was or can be made unlimited" (53 Cal. 2d
at 716, cit. Graham 101). Arguably, it is also the Ivanhoe decision that makes it possible
to market state water. In the Bums-Porter Act of 1959, the state's answer to Ivanhoe, the
state elected to use utility-type contracts on the 9(e) model (Graham, 188-90).
   63. For a bibliography on 9(e) contracts see Graham, p. 172, n. 440.
   64. They were invoking Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902 which makes fed-
erally supplied water be "appurtenant to the lands irrigated." Big landowners sought to
use this to establish permanent ownership in proportion to their holdings. Now they want
to sell their surplus waters—that's different (WahI, p. 148). Ironically, the concept of
appurtenancy originated with folk-hero John Wesley Powell (Terrell, pp. 198 if.), whose
aim was quite the reverse. Powell was assuming the land would be divided into small
tracts, so to him appurtenancy was a way of assuring subdivision of water.
   65. On the Kings' River, Pine Flat Dam developed new waters never usable before,
called "overschedule water." The locals demanded it all (Maass, 1951, p. 218). They also
demanded full control of all storage space in the reservoir. They also demanded the
power drops at Pine Flat and elsewhere (Kings' River Water Association, 1950, p. 11).
   66. John Wesley Powell's idea had been to induce subdivision of land by subdividing
water. This idea had been incorporated in the Reclamation Act, 1902. Although deeply
subverted, it has never been repealed. George Chaffey in 1882 at Etiwanda and Ontario
had developed another approach, subdividing land and water at the same time through
the device of the mutual water company (Alexander, pp. 32—34), dominant in southern
California. Mutuals, in spite of the name, are not true coops because voting is based on
acreage.
   67. I have discarded the vituperative pamphlets that used to flood the mails. For a long
bibliography of this "literary exchange of unpleasantries" see Graham, 196, n. 528. It
begins: "Kaupke Denounces Reclamation Bureau as Communistic and Untrustworthy,"
and runs on at that level of discourse.
  68. The Kings River Water Association, publisher of those unpleasantries, is organized
much like the MWDSC (analyzed below). Power is insulated from the voters in tiers, with
an appointed board weighted to under-represent populous, democratic irrigation districts
                                    Water Marketing                                      509
(Fresno, Aita and Consolidated) (op cit p. 6), and give power to a few big downstream
landowners through landowner fronts without any democratic franchise. There is an
executive committee appointed by the appointed board, and a powerful watermaster-
spokesman at the apex.
  69. Specifically, there was to be a Friant-Kings Canal, serving the lower Kings from the
San Joaquin; and a "Kings-Earlimart" Canal tapping Pine Flat and using the elevation thus
conserved to carry water south (Jopson and Giannelli, Plate 2).
  70. In 1982 they got the residency requirement repealed; in 1984 they were still work-
ing through Congress to force the Bureau to weaken enforcement of repayment provi-
sions (WahI, pp. 149, 66).
   71. A complete survey of political forces would include private power companies, who
opposed independently generated and distributed power from public multipurpose
projects, and had spiked state water power development in 1922 and 1925 (Sinclair, 1933,
p. 43). Their position was clearly anticompetitive.
   72. According to Morgan, the Corps next grabbed Maass, put him on the payroll and
silenced him. I have no first-hand opinion on how fair that appraisal is, but Ballard (1980)
later finds Maass indulgent toward the Corps and its clientele; Worster finds him 'sym-
pathetic toward agribuiness and its values" (Worster, p. 255).
   73. The cliché among standard economists is that we must choose between equity (for
the poor) and efficiency (for the general good). With landowner subsidies like these,
they have it backwards. Given time and space one could headline that as another Grand
Fallacy.
   74. In Kern County this era may never end. In the 1980s, Stuart Pyle, longtime Director
of the Kern County Water Agency, was still calling people "communistic" if they sug-
gested controlling or taxing pumping.
   75. Worster may be harsh. Clawson was outnumbered and tried to salvage what he
could in a compromise. It didn't work: the opposition refused to sign anyway (Acreage
Limitation, 1944).
   76. I saw him nearly daily from 1969—73. He did not warm to discussing this topic.
   77. The AES has long sided with the big owners (Kirkendall, 1964, p. 201; Worster, p.
251). ". . . agricultural economists ... have a vested interest in continuing their present
relationship with farmer clientele which could be jeopardized if the agricultural econo-
mists were viewed by farmers as opposing the interests of farmers" (Scott, Jr., and Chi-
come, p. 11).
   78. It is tempting to see Downey as a traitor to Upton Sinclair's cause but that is perhaps
too simple. Sinclair (1934) campaigned for California reform, explicitly opposing control
from Washington. Downey, opposing a federal agency, was in that limited sense true to
Sinclair. Otherwise, Downey does seem to have turned against his earlier professions.
   79. It calls to mind a sagebrush ballad of Clawson's youth, the one about the straight
narrow path.
   80. High-income farm corporations today are not sharply different from the 1930s,
while princes and wise men come and go. Some top incomes in the thirties went to
Limoneira, Corona Foothill, Irvine, Kern County Land, Sutter Basin, Miller and Lux, Cal-
510             American Journal of Economics and Sociology

pack (Del Monte),J.G. Boswell, El Tejon, etc. ("California Agricultural Background," 1939,
pp. 22851 if.)
  81. Cf. the iimp apologies of Angelides and Bardach, pp. 33—39, and WahI pp. 181—
85. To their credit, they felt some need to rationalize.
   82. This is done through the California Water District Act (Water Code Sections 34000
et seq.) The original water districts in California were "Wright Act" Irrigation Districts.
Products of the populist-Georgist era, they were and are controlled by popular vote. Large
landowners put through the later Water District Act to fend off popular control.
   83. She was appointed in 1976 to replace her deceased husband, James Krieger. It is
no disrespect to his memory (he is cited with respect herein), or to her personally, to
acknowledge the impropriety of treating public office like family property. It says a lot,
however, about the power and mindset of a tight circle who call themselves "Southern
California's water community" (MWDSC Focus, May, 1990, p. 7).
   84. MWD has built up a surplus, or "rate stabilization fund," that it uses to avoid peak-
load pricing. It also taps the fund for "interest-free" expansion capital (Krieger, 1991).
   85. Curiously, Scott Newhall, then editor of the San Francisco Chronicle, had opposed
the 1960 California Water Plan, predecessor of the (aborted) Peripheral Canal, "criticizing
the southern California penchant for population boosting" (Gottlieb, p. 505). It seems
probable that Newhall, a respected pro in the ancient center of anti-southern power, had
other priorities then. At that time Newhall lands were well outside the urban penumbra.
Their traditional citrus empire enjoyed prior claims on the Santa Clara River of the south
and state aid, which built Pyramid Dam on Piru Creek to regulate it.
   86. These Kern County and Tulare Lake Basin landowners are also organized in dis-
tricts with the land-based franchise, one-dollar one-vote. They favor the "Water Storage
District" form. Some of their names are Arvin Edison, Buena Vista, North Kern, Tulare
Lake Basin, Rosedale-Rio Bravo, Semitropic, and Wheeler Ridge-Maricopa (Graham, 207—
08, n. 577). There is not much chance for local residents to assume democratic control
of these districts and adopt policies favoring small farmers. The Kings River Water As-
sociation is organized in a manner analogous to the MWDSC (Kings River Water Asso-
ciation, 1950; Taylor 1949, p. 249).
   87. These interests are disclosed in MWDSC, April 10, 1981, "Answers to Commonly
Used Arguments against the Peripheral Canal."
   88. It would be reasonable to surmise that the Times'editorial position is driven mainly
by an interest in boosting its circulation. However, Dean Misczynski has shown that a
project furthered by the Times in 1984 would have had Southern California pay 6i percent
of the cost to get 8 percent to 13 percent of the water (Staff Report, Avocado Grower,
December, 1984, p. 10). That seems a dubious way to boost local prosperity and circu-
lation, leading one to imagine other motives like valorizing Kern County landholdings.
There is ample precedent from the 1913 "Chinatown" case.
   89. Upon losing, the Times showed its pride by running a Conrad cartoon of northern
California, whose votes had beaten the project, as a giant male figure spitefully urinating
south over the Tehachapis.
                                   Water Marketing                                     511
                                      References

Acreage Limitation in the Central Valley, 1944. A Report on Problem #19, Central Valley
     Project Studies. Berkeley: U.S.D.A., Bureau of Agricultural Economics. Mimeo.
Albonico v. Madera Irrigation District, 1951. No. 8497, Superior Court of California in
     and for the County of Madera, Memorandum Opinion and Order, Nov. 21.
Alexander, J.A. 1928. Lffe of George Chaffey. London: Macmillan and Co., Ltd.
American River Flood Control District v. Board of Supeivisors, Sacramento County, 130
     Cal Ap. 3d 707, 1982.
Anderson, Terry, 1983a. Water Crisis. Ending the Policy Drought. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
     kins University Press.
Anderson, Terry (ed.), 1983b. Water Rights: Scarce Resource Allocation, Bureaucracy
    and the Environment. Cambridge: Ballinger Press.
Angel, Arthur, 1944. Political and Administrative Aspects of the Central Valley Project of
     Ca4[ornia. Los Angeles: UCLA.
Angelides, Sotirios and Eugene Bardach, 1978. Water Banking. San Francisco: Inst. for
     Contemporary Studies.
Ballard, Patricia Louise, 1980. ". . . And Conflict Shall Prevail: Reclamation Law, Water
     Districts, and Politics in the Kings River Service Area of California." MA Thesis, UCLA
      School of Architecture and Urban Planning.
Bankole, Sharilyn, 1991. "MWD official wants to give more water to farmers." Riverside,
      The Press-Enterprise, March 30, p. A-4.
Billings, Bruce, 1986. "A Severance Tax on Water." A paper delivered at annual meetings,
      Western Tax Association.
Birdlebough, Stephen and Alfred Wilkins, 1971. 'Legal Aspects of Conjunctive Use in
      California." In David Seckler (ed.), Calf fornia Water. Berkeley: University of Cali-
      fornia Press, pp. 263—70.
Boulding, Kenneth, 1964. "The Economist and the Engineer: Economic Dynamics of Wa-
      ter Resource Development." In Stephen Smith and Emery Castle (eds.), Economics
      and Public Policy in Water Resource Development, Ames: Iowa State University
      Press, pp. 82—92.
Bowman, Chris, 1990. "This agency hits pay dirt in drought." The Sacramento Bee, June
      3, p. B—i.
Bradley, Michael, Rebecca Morales et al., 1981. The MUD. The Institution and Water
      Supply Planning. A Report Prepared for the City of Santa Monica. Los Angeles:
      UCLA, School of Architecture and Urban Planning.
Brewer, Michael, 1964. "Economics of Public Water Pricing: the California Case." In Ste-
      phen Smith and Emery Castle (eds.), Economics andPublicPolicy in WaterResource
      Development, Ames: Iowa State University Press, pp. 222—47.
Brown, Lee, and Helen Ingram, 1987. Water and Poverty in the Southwest. Tucson: Uni-
      versity of Arizona Press.
Bryce, James 1891. The American Commonwealth. London: Macmillan and Co. 2nd Edi-
      tion Revised. Volumes I, II.
512             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Buchanan, J.M. and Gordon Tullock, 1975. "Polluters, Profits and Political Response:
   Direct Controls vs. Taxes." American Economic Review 65:139—47.
Bumess, H. Stuart, and James P. Quirk, 1980. "Water Laws, Water Transfers, and Eco-
   nomic Efficiency: The Colorado River." Journal of Law and Economics 23 (April):
      133.
Bumess, H. Stuart, and James P. Quirk, 1979. "Appropriative Water Rights and the Effi-
     cient Allocation of Resources." American Economic Review 69:25—37.
Burnham, John, 1981. "Reevaluation of the Peripheral Canal." Los Angeles.
California Agricultural Background, 1939. Supplementary Exhibits, Part 62. Violations of
     Free Speech and Rights ofLabor. Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee
     on Education and Labor, U.S.S., 76th Cong. 3d Sess, pursuant to Sen. Resolution 266
     (74th Congress). Washington: U.S.G.P.O.
California Farm Bureau Federation, 1948. "Facts on the Water Rights and Other Issues
     Confronting Irrigation Agriculture." 2nd ed. Berkeley. Mimeo.
Canby, Judge William, 1991. Opinion in Santa Monica rent control case, 9th Circuit Court
     of Appeals, San Francisco, June 4, cited in Egelko, 1991.
Carpenter, G. Alvin, 1940. Farm Size in Ca4fornia. Berkeley: B.A.E., U.S.D.A., mimeo.
Carson, Richard T., and Robert C. Mitchell, 1988. "The Value of Clean Water." San Diego:
     Department of Economics, U.C.S.D., Discussion Paper 88—13.
Carson, Richard T., and Peter Navarro, 1988. "Fundamental Issues in Natural Resource
     Damage Assessment," NRJ28, Fall 88, pp. 815—36.
Caswell, Margriet, and David Zilberman, 1990. "Managing California's Water in the Long
      Run." Contemporary Policy Issues V11L92—105.
Central Valley Basin, 1949. USD1., Bureau of Reclamation. Senate Document 113, 81st
    Congress, 1st Session.
Clawson, Marion, and Jack Knetsch, 1966. Outdoor Recreation. Baltimore: The Johns
     Hopkins Press.
Clawson, Marion, 1987. From Sagebrush to Sage. Washington: Ana Publications.
Coase, Ronald, 1960. "The Problem of Social Cost."Journal of Law and Economics 3(1),
    October, pp. 1—44.
Consolidated People's Ditch Company v. Foothill Ditch Company, 1928. 205 Calif. 54,269
    Pac. 915.
Cooper, Erwin, 1968. Aqueduct Empire. Glendale, California, Arthur H. Clark.
County of Fresno v. Malstrom, 94 Cal App 3rd 974, 1979.
Crampton, Frank, 1952. "California's War with the 'Welfare State'." U.S.A., November, pp.
      97—104.
Crooke, Howard, District Manager, Orange County Water Conservation District, Santa
    Ana, speaking to the Water Study Section, Commonwealth Club of California, Feb-
    mary 5, 1959. The Minutes are not for publication, but the facts cited here are of
    public record.
Cummings, Ronald, et al., 1986. Valuing Public Goods: an Assessment of the Contingent
     Valuation Method. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allenheld.
Dean's Committee of College of Agriculture and Environmental Science, 1968. Agricul-
                                   Water Marketing                                     513
     tural Development of New Lands, West Side of San Joaquin Valley, Land, Crops and
    Economics. Report #1, U.C. Davis, 15 Feb.
Dennis, Hany, 1981. Water and Power. San Francisco: Friends of the Earth.
DeRoos, Robert, 1948. The Thirsty Land. Stanford University Press.
Dinuba Sentinel, 1947. "Kaupke Denounces Reclamation Bureau as Communistic and
   Untrustworthy," April 17.
Downey, Senator Sheridan, 1947. They Would Rule the Valley. San Francisco: privately
    printed.
Dunning, Harrison, 1982a. "The Water Rights Tangle." California Tomorrow, Spring, Vol.
    17, No. 2, pp. 19—23.
Dunning, Harrison, 1982b. Water Allocation in California: Legal Rights and Reform
     Needs. Berkeley: Institute of Governmental Studies, U.C.
Dunning, Harrison, 1990. "Dam Fights Make California's Water Policy." Bay on Trial
     2(2—3):12—16. (The Bay Institute of San Francisco, 10 Liberty Ship Way #120, Sau-
     salito CA 94965.)
Egelko, Bob, 1991. "Santa Monica wins rent control battle." Los Angeles Times,June 5, p.
     A-4.
Ellis, Virginia, 1991a. "Bill Altering Use of U.S. Water in State Stirs Sparks." Los Angeles
     Times, May 31, p. A—3.
Ellis, Virginia, 1991b. "Panel OKs Bill Easing Limits on Water Sales." Los Angeles Times,
      June 5, p. A—3.
Ellis, Virginia, 1991c. "Urban Water Bill OKd by Assembly." Los Angeles Times, July 3, p.
     A-3.
Evans, Jan, 1989. "Legislative Update." Watchword 1 1(23):1—2. Santa Barbara: Santa Bar-
     bara Board of Realtors, July 28.
Feinerman, Eli, and Keith Knapp, 1982. "Benefits from Ground Water Management: Mag-
     nitude, Sensitivity and Distribution." Mimeo. Department of Soils and Environmental
     Sciences, University of California, Riverside.
Fellmeth, Robert (ed.), 1971. Powerand Land in Ca4fornia. In two volumes. Washington:
     Center for Study of Responsive Law.
Fellmeth, Robert, 1973. Politics of Land. NY: Grossman Publishers.
Fischhoff, Baruch, 1990. Book review of Mitchell and Carson, Using Surveys. Public Opin-
     ion Quarterly 54:286-89.
Fulton, William, 1996. "Shifting Politics of Water." Los Angeles Times May 19, p. M—1.
Gaffney, Mason, 1960. "Rural—urban Competition for Water." JFE42 (December): 1363—
     66.
Gaffney, Mason, 1961. "Diseconomies Inherent in Western Water Laws: a California Case
     Study." Economic Analysis and Multiple Use, Report #9 in the series Water and
     Range Resources and Economic Development of the West. Proceedings of Western
     Agricultural Economics Research Council, Range and Water Section, Tucson, Jan-
     uary 1961, pp. 55—82. Republished, Hearings on Economic Analysis and the Effi-
     ciency of Government. U.S. Congress. Joint Economic Committee. Subcommittee
     on Efficiency in Government. Part 2, pp. 389—405.
514               American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Gaffney, Mason, 1962a. 'Comparison of Market Pricing and Other Means of Allocating
    Water Resources." Water Law and Policy in the Southeast. Southeastern Water Law
     Conference, Univ. of Ga., Nov. 1961, published by Inst. of Law and Govt., Univ. of
    Ga., in cooperation with the Farm Foundation and the Southeastern Land Tenure
     Research Committee, pp. 195—229.
Gaffney, Mason, 1962b. "Water Law and Economic Transfers of Water: a Reply." JFE
      44(2):427—34, May.
Gaffney, Mason, 1966. "Milliman on Urban Water Price and Tax Policy." American Jour-
     nal of Economics and Sociology, 35 (September), pp. 399—404.
Gaffney, Mason, 1967. "Urban Water Supply—A Second Look." American Economic
     Association Proceedings, May, pp. 192—95.
Gaffney, Mason, 1969. "Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy." American Journal
     of Economics and Sociology 38(2):131—44, April. Republished in Charles J. Meyers
     and Dan Tarlock (eds.) Water Resource Management: a Law School Case Book.
     Stanford Law School. Republished in Jesse Dukeminier and James Krier (eds.) Prop-
     erty. Boston: Little, Brown, 1981.
Gaffney, Mason, 1973. "A Critique of Federal Water Policy." In R. Haveman and R. Ham-
     nm, eds., The Political Economy of Federal Policy. New York. Harper and Row.
Gaffney, Mason, 1977. "Diseconomics Inherent in Our Present Water Law." Final Report
     of the Commssion on Water Rights. Sacramento.
Gaffney, Mason, 1982. "Why I Recommend a 'No' Vote on the Resolution to Endorse the
     Peripheral Canal Proposal." Appendix to Report and Recommendation on Periph-
     eral Canal, Report of Public Utility Commission to City Council, City of Riverside, in
     my capacity as Public Utility Commissioner, pp. 1—7.
Gaffney, Mason, 1988. "Tapping Land Rents after Prop. 13." Western TaxReview(annual),
      pp. 1—55.
Gaffney, Mason, 1989. "Non—point Pollution." J. of Business Administration 18(1 & 2),
     (Special Issue: Future Directions for Economics), pp. 133—54.
Gaffney, Mason, 1992a. "Rising Concentration and Falling Property Tax Rates." In Gene
     Wunderlich (ed.), Land Ownership and Taxation in American Agriculture. Boul-
     der: Westview Press, pp. 119—37.
Gaffney, Mason, 1992b. "The Taxable Surplus in Water Resources." ContemporaryPolicy
     Issues 10 (October): pp. 74—82.
Gaffney, Mason, in press, 1997. "Who Owns Southern California?" In Kenneth Wenzer
     (ed.), Our Land and Land Policy. Rochester: Rochester University Press.
Gates, Paul, 1961. "California's Agricultural College Lands." Pacific Historical Revtew 30
      (May): pp. 103—22.
Gates, Paul, 1970. "The Suscol Principle, Preemption, and California Latifundia." Pacific
     Historical Review 39 (November): pp. 395—430.
Gates, Paul, 1975. "Public Land Disposal in California." In James Shideler (ed.), Agricul-
     ture in the Development of the Far West. Washington: The Agricultural History So-
     ciety.
Gates, Paul, 1978. "California Land Policy and its Historical Context: the Henry George
                                   Water Marketing                                      515
     Era." Institute of Governmental Studies, Four Persistent Issues. Berkeley: University
     of California, pp. 1—30.
George, Henry, 1871, rpt. 1901. Our Land and Land Policy. New York: Doubleday and
    McClure Co.
George, Henry, 1879, rpt. 1929. Progress and Poverty. New York: Modem Library.
George, Henry, 1898, rpt. 1939. The Science of Political Economy. New York: The Robert
     Schalkenbach Foundation.
Gleason, Victor E., 1977. "Los Angeles v. San Fernando: Ground Water Management in
     the Grand Tradition." 4 Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly, pp. 703, 709.
Goldenweiser, E.A., and Leon Truesdell, 1920. Farm Tenancy in the United States. U.S.
     Bureau of the Census, Census Monograph #4.Washington: U.S.G.P.O.
Goldschmidt, Walter, 1947. As You Sow. The Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois.
Goldschmidt, Walter, 1975. "A Tale of Two Towns." In Peter Barnes (ed.), The Peoples'
     Land. Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press, for the National Coalition for Land Reform, pp.
     171—75.
Goodall, Merrill, John D. Sullivan and Timothy De Young, 1978. Ca4fornia Water. A New
      Political Economy. N.Y.: Allenheld.
Goodall, Merrill, and James Jamieson, 1974. "Property Qualification Voting in Rural Cal-
      ifornia's Water Districts." Land Economics 50 (August): 292—94.
Goodall, Merrill, 1991. "Property and Water Institutions in California." Draft, pp. 1—18,
      available from author, Claremont Graduate School.
Gottlieb, Robert, and Irene Wolt, 1977. Thinking Big. New York: Putnam.
Gottlieb, Robert, and Peter Wiley, 1982. Empires in the Sun. New York: Putnam.
Gottlieb, Robert, 1988. A Life of Its Own. NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers.
Graham, Leland 0., 1961. Some Aspects of Federal—State Relationships in California Water
      Resources Development. (Duplication process) Sacramento.
Hadly, Scott, 1990. "Is water marketing a monster?" Bay on Trial 2(2&3):17.
Hall, Carlyle, et al., 1979. Petitioner brief in O'Toole v. Irvine Ranch Water District, Su-
     perior Court, State of California, County of Orange, Civ. Nos. 29—12—52, 29—12—63,
    with Stipulation thereto.
Hanemann, Michael, 1991. "Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: How Much
     Can They Differ?" American Economic Review 81(3):635—47.
Hardin, Garrett, April, 1966. "Equality, One World and Science," Western Destiny, p. 17.
Harding, S.T., 1950. "Background of California Water and Power Problems," 38 CalLaw
     Rev 547.
Harding, S.T., 1960. Water in California. Palo Alto: N—P Publications.
Henley, Albert, 1969. "Land Value Taxation by California Irrigation Districts." In Arthur
     Becker (ed.), Land and Building Taxes. Madison: UW Press, pp. 137—45.
Herfindahl, Orris, and Allen Kneese, 1965. "Some Problems Associated with the Use of
     Rural Areas." Quality of the Environment. Washington: Resources for the Future,
     Inc., pp. 74—79. Rpt. in David Brooks (ed.), 1974. Resource Economics. Washington:
     Resources for the Future, Inc., pp. 285—89.
Hirshleifer, Jack, James DeHaven, and Jerome Milliman, 1960. Water Supply. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.
516             AmericanJournal of Economics and Sociology
Huffman, James L., 1993. 'State Law of Water Rights." "Federal Allocation and Regulation
    of Water." In Polly Dyer (ed.), Whose Water? Past; Present; Future. Seattle: Institute
    for Environmental Studies, University of Washington, pp. 7—12.
Huffman, Roy, 1953. Irrigation Development and Public Water Policy. New York: The
      Ronald Press Co.
Hutchins, Wells, 1956a. The California Law of Water Rights. Sacramento: State Engineer
      of California in cooperation with Production Economics Research Branch, Agricul-
      tural Research Service, U.S.D.A.
Hutchins, Wells, 1956b. Imgation Water Rights in California. AES'Circ. 452.
Hutchins, Wells, 1967. Irrigation Water Rights in California. AE Circ. 452, revised.
Hutchins, Wells, 1977. Water Rights Laws in the Nineteen Western States, Vols. I—HI.
      Completed by Harold Ellis and Peter DeBraal. Misc. Pub. #1206, Natural Resource
      Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
      Washington: U.S.G.P.O.
In re Hood River, 1924. 114 Oregon 112, 227 Pac. 1065.
Ivanhoe ID. v. Courtney McCracken, 357 U.S. 275, 1958
Jaquette, David L., and Nancy Moore, with Albert J. Lipson, 1978. Efficient Water Use in
      California: Groundwater Use and Management. Santa Monica: The RAND Corpo-
      ration.
Johnson, R.W., 1989. "Water Pollution and the Public Trust Doctrine." Environmental
      Law Review 19: 485—513.
Jopson, L.C., and W.R. Gianelli, 1955. Water Right Applications by State Department of
     Finance. . and Other Related Matters. Sacramento: State of California, Division
     of Water Resources.
Kahrl, William (ed.), 1978. California Water Atlas. Sacramento: State of California.
Kahrl, William, 1982. Water and Power. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kaupke, Charles, 1957. Forty Years on the Kings' River. Fresno: Hume Printing, for The
     Kings River Water Association.
Kings River Water Association, 1950. Kings River — Facts and Falsehoods. Fresno: Kings
     River Water Association.
Kirkendall, Richard, 1964. "Social Science in the Central Valley of California." California
      Historical Society Quarterly 43 (3): 195—2 18.
Kirkendall, Richard, 1966. Social Scientists and Farm Politics in the Age of Roosevelt.
     Columbia, Mo.: University of Missouri Press.
Knapp, Keith, and Henry J. Vaux, Jr., 1982. "Barriers to Effective Ground Water Manage-
     ment: the California Case." Ground Water 20(1):61—66.
Krieger, James, and Harvey Banks, 1962. "Ground Water Basin Management." 50 Cali-
    fornia Law Review 56.
Krieger, Lois Boylan, 1991. "MWD Reserves." Los Angeles Times, Editorial Page, May 12.
LaBahn, Edward A., 1971. "Taxation of Water Rights by Local Government." University
    of Southern California, School of Public Administration, typewritten, pp. 1—19.
Landownershp Survey on Federal Reclamation Projects, 1946. USD1., Bureau of Rec-
    lamation. Washington: U.S.G.P.O.
                                  Water Marketing                                   517
La?ge Landholdings in Southern California (A Report on), with Recommendations, 1919.
     Issued by California Commission on Immigration and Housing. Sacramento: Cali-
     fornia State Printing Office.
Leake, Robert Jr., and Stanley Barnes, 1979. The Pine Flat Project on Kings River, Cali-
    fornia: Should Reclamation Law Applj.? Fresno: Kings River Water Users' Commit-
     tee.
Legislative Analyst, 1957. Economics of a State Water Program. Sacramento: California
     State Legislature.
Le Veen, Philip, and Laura King, 1985. Turning Off the Tap on Federal Water Supplies.
     San Francisco, The National Resources Defense Council.
Levin, Myron, 28 December 1988, "U.S. Issues New Policy on Marketing Water," Los
     Angeles Times, p. 1—3.
Maass, Arthur, and Raymond Anderson, 1978. And the Desert Shall Rejoice: Conflict,
    Growth and Justice in Arid Environments. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Maass, Arthur, 1951. Muddy Waters. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Maass, Arthur, 1952. The King's River Project. Inter—University Case Program. New York:
    Harcourt Brace & Co.
MacCannell, Dean, and Jerry White, 1984. "The Social Costs of Large-scale Agriculture:
     The Prospects of Land Reform in California." In Charles Geisler and Frank Popper
     (eds.), Land Reform: American Style, Totowa, NJ.: Rowman & Allenheld, pp. 35—
     54.
Marts, Marion E., 1961. "When Can California Join the Union?" Presidential Address, As-
     sociation of Pacific Coast Geographers, in 1961 Yearbook, Association of Pacific
     Coast Geographers.
McWilliams, Carey, 1939. "Land Monopolization." Chap. 2, Factories in the Field, Boston:
     Little, Brown and Co., pp. 11—27.
McWilliams, Carey, 1976. California: the Great Exception. Santa Barbara: Peregrine Smith.
Merritt, John, 1968. "Project Ground Water." Washington Law Review 44: pp. 259—306.
Metzler, Barbara, 1991. "MWD OKs builder's plea for annexation." Riverside, The Press—
     Enteiprise, February 28, p. B—4.
Mitchell, David L., 1993. WaterMarketing in California. San Francisco: Foster Economics.
Mitchell, Robert C., and Richard Carson, 1981. "An Experiment in Determining Willing-
     ness to Pay for National Water Quality Improvements," draft report to the U.S. EPA.
     Washington, D.C.
Mitchell, Robert C., and Richard Carson, 1989. Using Surveys to Value Public Goods: the
     Contingent Valuation Method. Washington: Resources for the Future.
Moore, Nancy, and Timothy Quinn, 1984. "If 'Water—rich' Californians Could Sell, We'd
     All Profit." Los Angeles Times, September 17, editorial page.
Moore, Nancy, 1991. "There Are Ways to Lessen Water Crisis." Los Angeles Times, May
     8, editorial page.
Morgan, Arthur, 1971. Dams and other Disasters. Boston: Porter Sargent Publishers.
Muir, Frederick, 1991. "MWD Has Too Much of a Good Thing - Reservoirs Brimming."
     Los Angeles Times, 20 August, p. B—i.
518             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
National Planning Association, 1971. "Federal Land Reclamation." An NPA Agriculture
     Committee Policy Statement. Looking Ahead 19(7):1—7.
News Services, 1991. "Millions of Californians awash in unmetered water." Riverside, The
      Press—Enteiprise, March 16, p. A—3.
Ostrom, Vincent, 1954. Water and Politics. Los Angeles: The Haynes Foundation.
Patterson, Tom, 1991. "The Search for Water: How Riverside Got an Early Start." Riverside,
      The Press—Enterprise, 28 April, p.B—5.
Peterson, Cass, 1986. "Farms Come Up Dry in Arizona Water Project." Los Angeles Times,
     June 9, p. IV—2.
Phelps, Charles, Nancy Moore, and Morlie Graubard, 1978. Efficient Water Use in Cali-
     fornia: Water Rights, Water Districts, and Water Transfers. Report to the California
      State Assembly Rules Committee, Prepared in part under a grant from the Rockefeller
      Foundation. Santa Monica: The RAND Corporation.
Phelps, Charles, Nancy Moore, and Timothy Quinn, 1982. "The Challenge of Water Con-
      servation: Sharing the Burden Equally." Sacramento Bee, December 30, page no.
      n.a.
Post, Man, Chairman, 1982. Report of the Task Force on California's Water Future. State
      of California, Commission for Economic Development, Sacramento.
Powell, John Wesley 1878. Report on the Lands of the Arid Regions of the United States,
      ed. Wallace Stegner, 1962. Cambridge, Mass.
Pring, George, and Karen Tomb, 1979. "License to Waste." Proceedings, 25th Annual
      Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Institute, Article 25, pp. 1—67.
Roberts, Polly, 1971. "Power and Land in California." A summary of the Nader Report
     chaired by Robert Fellmeth, 1971, q.v.
Robie, Ronald, 1978. "Water Issues Facing California." Institute of Governmental Studies,
      Four Persistent Issues. Berkeley: University of California, pp. 31—52.
Robinson, W.W., 1948. Land in Ca4fornia. Berkeley: U.C. Press.
Salamon, Kathleen, 1991. "Desalination plant to treat basin's nitrate—laced water." Los
      Angeles Times, March 12, pB—i.
Saliba, Bonnie C., and David Bush, 1987. Water Markets in Theory and Practise: Market
      Transfers, Water Values, and Public Policy. Boulder: Westview Press.
Sapiro, Stanley, 1953. Appellant's Opening Brief, Hanks v. Board of Equalization.
Sax, Joseph, 1990. "The Constitution, Property Rights and the Future of Water Law," Uof
      Colorado Law Rev 6 1:257.
Schultz, T.W., 1954. "Some Guiding Principles in Organizing Agricultural Economics Re-
      search." JFE 36:18—2 1.
Scott, John Jr., and David Chicoine, 1991. "Equity in Real Estate Taxation." University of
      Illinois, No. 91 E—465. Paper given at the Western Economics Association meeting,
      Seattle, July 2, 1991.
Seckler, David (ed.), 1971. California Water. Berkeley: University of California Press. Staff
      Report, 1984. "Water Trading Suggested as One Way to Deal with Future." Avocado
      Grower, December, p. 10.
Sinclair, Upton, 1933. I, Governor of California, and How I Ended Poverty. Los Angeles,
      privately published.
                                    Water Marketing                                      519
Sinclair, Upton, 1994 [19341. 1, Candidate for Governor and Howl Got Licked. Berkeley:
     University of California.
Steinbeck, John, 1939. The Grapes of Wrath. NY: The Viking Press Inc.
Storper, Michael, and Richard Walker, 1984. The Price of Water. Berkeley: Institute of
     Governmental Studies, University of California.
Taylor, Paul S., 1949. 'The Central Valley Project: Water and Land." The Western Political
     Quarterly 2:228—53, rpt. Taylor, Paul S., 1979.
Taylor, Paul S., 1955. "The Excess Land Law: Execution of a Public Policy." The YaleLaw
    Journal 64(4):455—514, February.
Taylor, Paul S., 1957. "Destruction of Federal Reclamation Policy? The Ivanhoe Case."
     Stanford Law Review 10:76—111, December.
Taylor, Paul S., 1958. "Excess Land Law on the Kern?" 46 California Law Review 2, 153,
     May.
Taylor, Paul 5., 1973—75. "Paul S. Taylor, California Social Scientist." Interviews conducted
     by Suzanne B. Riess and Malca Chall, Regional Oral History Office. Berkeley: Ban-
     croft Library.
Taylor, Paul S., 1974. "Whose Dam Is Pine Flat?" The Pacific Spectator 8:349—359, rpt.
     Taylor, Paul S., 1979.
Taylor, Paul 5., 1976. "Walter Goldschmidt's Baptism by Fire." Anthropology UCLA 8:129—
     40, rpt. Taylor, Paul S., 1979.
Taylor, Paul S., 1979. Essays on Land, Water and the Law in California. NY: Amo Press.
Taylor, Paul S., 1981. "Water in your COFPHE." California Monthly, Jan—Feb.
Teitz, Michael, and Richard Walker, 1982. "Industry." In Ernest Engelbert. (ed.), Compe-
      tition for California Water. Berkeley: UC Press.
Terrell, John U., 1969. The Man Who Red iscovered America. NY: Weybright and Talley.
Trelease, Frank, 1957. "Government Ownership and Trusteeship of Water." 45 Cal Law
     Rev 638.
Trelease, Frank, 1961. "Water Law and Economic Transfers of Water."JFE43:1147—52.
Truesdell, Leon, 1931. "Farm Tenancy in the United States." In E.R.A. Seligman (ed.),
     Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 6. New York: The Macmillan Co.
Tulare Irrigation District v. Lindsay—Strathmore Irrigation District, 1935.3 Calif. 2nd 489,
     45 Pac. (2nd) 1972.
van Schilfgaarde, Jan, 1979. "Water Conservation Potential in Irrigated Agriculture." Pro-
      ceedings, 34th Annual Meeting of the Soil Conservation Society ofAmerica, Ottawa,
      pp. 105—15. Available from USDA Salinity Control Laboratory, Riverside, California.
van Schilfgaarde, Jan, 1982. "The Wellton—Mohawk Dilemma." Water Supply and Man-
      agement 6(1/2):1 15—27
Villarejo, Don, 1981. New LandsforAgriculture: the California State WaterProject. Davis:
      California Institute for Rural Studies.
Villarejo, Don, 1986. "How Much Is Enough?" Federal Water Subsidies and Agriculture
      in California's Central Valley. Davis: California Institute for Rural Studies, Inc.
Villarejo, Don, andJudith Redmond, 1988. Missed Opportunities—SquanderedResources.
      Davis: California Institute for Rural Studies.
520             American Journal of Economics and Sociology
WahI, Richard, 1989. Markets for Federal Water. Subsidies, Property Rights, and the Bu-
     reau of Reclamation. Washington: Resources for the Future.
Walker, Richard, and Michael Storper, 1982. "The Expanding California Water System."
    In Wj. Kockelman et al. (eds.), San 'Francisco Bay: Use and Protection. San Fran-
    cisco: Pacific Division, A.A.A.S.
Wame, William, 1947. "Land Speculation." Reclamation Era 33(8):176—77.
Warren, Jennifer, 1991a. "Farmland Eyed as MWD Water Source." Los Angeles Times, 26
    April, p. A-3.
Warren, Jennifer, 1991b. "Well—made Plans keep Palm Springs an Oasis." Los Angeles
      Times, 28 April, p. A—3.
Weatherford, Gary, Kim Malcolm and Barbara Andrews, 1982. "California Groundwater
     Management: The Sacred and the Profane." Natural ResourcesJournal22 (4):1031—
     44, October.
Wetzel, Bruce, 1978. Efficient Water Use in California: Economic Modeling of Ground-
     water Development with Applications to Groundwater Management. Santa Monica:
     The RAND Corporation.
White, Gilbert, 1967. "The Changing Role of Water in Arid Lands." Arizona Review 16(3),
      March, pp. 1—8.
Wilson, Edwin, and Marion Clawson, 1945. Agricultural Land Ownershib and Operation
     in the Southern San Joaquin Valley. Berkeley: USDA, Bureau of Agricultural Eco-
    nomics.
Worster, Donald, 1985. Rivers of Empire. New York: Pantheon Books.
Wright, Donald, Chairman. Governor's Commission to Review California Water Rights
     Law, 1978. Final Report. Sacramento: State Printer.
Wright v. Best, 1942. 19 Cal (2d) 368, 382 121 Pac. (2d) 702.
Young, Robert, John Daubert, and Hubert Morel-Seytoux, 1986. "Evaluating Institutional
    Alternatives for Managing an Interrelated Stream—Aquifer System." AJAE68(4):787—
     97
Young, Robert, and William Martin, 1967. "The Economics of Arizona's Water Problem,"
     Arizona Review, College of Business, 16(3): pp. 9—18.
Zonlight, Margaret A. Cooper, 1979. Land, Water and Settlement in Kern County, Cali-
    fornia, 1850-1890. New York: Arno Press.
