. Baa. we Rant titi: * sie 7 ™ : a fom Sete bite fatten eae " 7 — ma . ah ne : pit F Ss .
gS
DISECONOMIES INHERENT IN WESTERN WATER LAWS
A CALIFPORNTA CASE STUDY
by
Mason Gaffney
University of Missouri ,
A paper read before the Western Agricultural
 ! Economics Research Council at Tucson, Arizona
| on Jée-uary 23, 1961 |
i
As published in Econor:s Arelysis of Multiple Use,
| Report No, 9 in the series Water and Renge Resources and
E mic Development oz the West, Proceedings of
W. earn Agricultural Economics Research Council,
Range and Water Section, Tucson, Arizona,
January 23-24, 1961, pp, 55-82.
Eme: > -d
ee ta . . .
ny ; . -
TABLE OF CONTENTS e
, Page
_ I. Introduction 1
II, Diseconomies in the Kaweah River distributary
system , 5
A. Indications of wide dispersion of marginal
revenue productivities of water within the
system 5
1, Water conservation expenses . 6
2. Marginal costs of lifting ground water 9
3. Water applied per acre 10
4, Value of output per acre-foot 11
5, Production response to increased water
supply 13
6. Land-value response to increased water
supply 14
7. Willingness to pay for water and water
rights 15
8, Competent appraisals of soils and climate 16
9. Size of farms 16
B, Unreliability of water supply 17 _
1. Aggregate variability in the system 17
2. Distribution of variability among water-
users 18
C, Excess diversion capacity 20
1
Page
_ D. Excess canal mileage 20
° 1, Scattered service area 21
2. Overlapping service areas 21
: : 3. Unintegrated ditches , 22
. E, Conveyance losses ; ; 23
1. Loss of elevation 23
2. Channel seepage 23
F, Inadequate use of the ground reservoir 24
1, Storage use 24
2. Permanent recharge 25
G. Inadequate reuse of water 26
‘H, Segregation of the Kaweah from small local
streams 27
I. Segregation of the Kaweah from the Kings River 28
I1lI. The role of water law in imposing and perpetuating
diseconomies 30
A, Productivity not the initial basis of water
rights 30 -
1, Riparian rights 30
2. Appropriative rights 31
3. Correlative rights 32
B. The initial pattern is frozen 33
1, Allegations of transferability | 33
;
. - Page i
is
2. Kinds of transfers achieved on the Kaweah 34
3. Uneconomic aspects of these transfers 35
a. Fixed point of diversion 35 -
b. Short-run inflexibility 36
ec. Deconsolidation of service areas 37
ff 4. Limited area of transfer 37 |
4, Kinds of transfers blocked 2 iw 7 37”
a. Riparian rights 37 ,
b. Correlative rights , 38
c. Appropriative rights 38
(1) Uncertainty of tenure 38
(2) Marginal adjustments 40
(3) Rights held by water-users' organi-
zations 4l ;
(4) Point of diversion 43
IV. The dynamic evolution shaped by water law 44
A, Marginal vs. monumental adjustments 44
B, Drawbacks of monumental projects 46
1, Size of increment 46 -
2. Slow response to changing demands 49
3. A cycle of overdevelopment 49
a. Lag of private land improvement behind
public works 50
b,. Incitement of competing projects 50
(1) The price umbrella 50
: Page
(2) Racing for water rights §1 .
(3) Logrolling 51 .
C. Current overexpansion of water-supply projects 52 - ;
Vv. Conclusion 56
}
a
s
é
:
é
t
a t
: | }
i
aaa xe ee ee
DISECONOMIES INHERENT IN WESTERN WATER LAWS: F
A CALIFORNIA CASE STUDY
I, Introduction 7
. Is our system of water law compatible with economic use of
the resource? This old question came again to the fore as the
postwar cycle of resource development brought renewed pressures
on limited water resources. For a time the negative answer ,
‘seemed ascendant, at least in the intellectual world (it made 5
somewhat less headway with the holders of superior water rights.) ;
More recently the positive has been accentuated by Professors q
s. V. Wantrup?, Stephen smith’, George Tolley?, v. Ss. Hastings”, y
and others, Even Professor S, T. Harding, who once might have :
been regarded as a sharp critic of the system? (espectally its F
riparian components), has recently risen to its defense.° :
:
1 Wantrup, 5S, V., "Concepts Used as Economic Criteria for a i
System of Water Rights'', 32 Land Economics (4) 295-312, ~
November, 1956, j
| 2 Smith, Stephen, "Legal and Institutional Controls in Water f
Allocation", 42 JFE (5) 1345-58, December, 1960. f
3 Folley, George, and Hastings, V. S., “Optimal Water Allocation I
for the North Platte River”, dittoed MS, nd, (c. 1957). f
?
‘ 4 Harding, Sidney T,, Water Rights for Irrigation. (Stanford; t
Stanford University Press, 1936). t
5 Harding, Sidney T,, Water in California, (Palo Alto: N-P
Publications, 1960), pp. 59-60, 211-12. Professor Harding
is specifically contrasting the established diligence prin-
1 ciple favorably against the exemption from diligence of
1 filings by the State. But his language and evident purport i
4 become much more general. ,
'
5 “ .
q - 2. | |
; -Watle it {8 hazardous to summarize se-many authors, they... i.

seem to share the view that water law in its entirety does not :
. work out in practice in nearly the absurd ways that one might .
expect from a priori analysis of the enunciated principles; -
that in fact it would be hard to improve on the allocation ;
achieved in the field; and critics should be required to show
how allocation might be improved. q
This allegation shifts the emphasis of the debate from the ;
analysis of principles to the observation of practice. For ‘
this purpose I have selected the Kaweah River system, which E
is in the southeastern San Joaquin Valley, largely in Tulare
: County. This system, like all local situations, is unusual f
in some particulars, but contains diseconomies of kinds and :
g in degrees that in my observation prevail throughout the (
Valley and the State. /
The Kaweah system makes a good study area for the following ie
° reasons: :
A. Unusually complete data on diversions are available.
The stream has long been administered by a water master, and :
his 1920-55 records of daily flows in the ditches of some 21 [
water user organizations are published in California Division a
3 of Water Resources Bulletins 49, 49A and 4op°, ]
ee
6 State of California, Department of Public Works, Division f
: of Water Resources, Kaweah River Flows, Diversions and Ser- :
é vice Areas, Bulletins Nos. 4°, 49A, and 49B (Sacramento: _ I
{ State Printing Office, 1940, 1950, and 1956.) | f
i
:
-3- ; :
S a ng-the-Kaweah River. emerges from the foothills At fans. _ i
out over an alluvial cone, in such wise that water may be
shifted among the rival claimante through existing channels :
with minimal transfer costs. There is therefore, no appre- )
. ciable transportation cost barrier among the separate water 7 a
users to complicate the analysis. :
C. There is no great problem of water quality to compli-
cate the analysis. , i
D. The wnit is small enough for analysis in some depth, :
yet its institutions are complex and varied enough to pre- F
sent in microcosm many basic problems of water law. ;
E. The river is located where water is clearly the lim- iq
iting factor on economic expansion. A high scarcity value
imputes to Kaweah River water, so there are compelling
economic reasons for allocating it to its best uses.
F, The area is important for its own sake. It was the
{ alleged crisis of this area that originally triggered off
the Central Valley Project in the ‘twenties, and it remains |
the major payoff area for that project. It is the major |
: State and national producer of navel oranges and plums, and
an important producer of clings and freestones. In respect -
f to water law, the Kaweah is the locale of at least two
L
|
?
ani : i m . — — ” elite ne _ use is _ . , 3 eee) a a n° em we ee rhe ae =*
ad a. :
. ~4- - |
teading cases, Tulare Irrigation District vs. Lindsay- :-
Strathmore Irrigation District, @ and Ivanhoe Irrigation Dis-
‘crict and the State of California vs. McCracken, et al. 6b
1
G. Toward the end of the period of study the area received ,
a large imported water supply from the completed Central
Valley Project. Observation of the reactions of the local . d
water economy to this increment has brought out a number of
significant points that are obscured in a static situation.
| t
H
7 }
| it
;
| | |
rf .
h
4 ee
4 ba 3 :
3 Calif, (2d) 489, 45 Pac, (2d) 972 (1935)
3
6
> 357 U.S. 275 (1958) .
e _ 3
| ae -5- |
-§} — 15, —Disecongmies in the Kaweah River Distributary System i .
|
A. Indications of wide dispersion of marginal revenue pro- '
ductivities of water within the system, i
; It is a weakness of much grand-scale project planning to ;
4 assume implicitly that there is an operative local market mech-= !
4 anism which has succeeded in equating the marginal productiv- ; i
: ities of water among different users. Thus, one hears statements i
i of the order "Down in Tulare County they pay $15 an acre-foot f
for water". In fact, in the Kaweah system, the marginal pro- E
ductivity. of water varies from less than zero in some areas ;
(where it is applied in such excess as to damage crops and
j soil) to an upper figure that I hesitate to specify. To save 4
: a heavy citrus crop worth $1,000 an acre on the tree, and to j
q save the trees themselves, a marginal acre-foot at the critical iy
4 moment assumes a short-run value many times greater than the ’
maxima we ordinarily discuss. Within the area there have been
: citrus groves in just such straits at the very moment that ‘
i water was wasting elsewhere. 7
So great is the range of marginal productivities obtaining je
in the system that it is possible, without pretending to fine ;
; “uccuracy, to establish the contrast beyond cavil. These con- is
‘ trasts have persisted over several decades because, as we :
4 ‘nzll see, the system's evolution has been almost completely
i «rrested since before 1920. t
3 Each of over twenty water user groups has its own insulated ;
Fupply-demand balance, hence its own marginal productivity. .
‘ linds without surface water using pumped wells of greatly 7
is ‘
: ; -6- .
“—“Gyvergent fte-have-etill more separate marginal productivities. h
‘ This paper focuses on what is probably the most extreme diver-
; gences that between the "thermal" areas, the "coves" and bench-
4 ands above about 350' elevation, and the lower Kaweah delta ;
of cold nights and alkali-damaged soils. The thermal zone is | !
: adapted for citriculture; the lower. delta at best for alfalfa .
‘ and cotton, at worst for barley and pasture, These areas are
: in direct competition for the same water deliverable by gravity.
to either area through existing channels.
There are several means by which the outside observer can I
| estimate the marginal productivity of water. In the larger t
study from which this paper is drawn many of these means were [
essayed. While some of them eventuate in only crude estimates,
plus or minus considerable margins of doubt, they are adequate
to the present purpose which is simply to establish the contrast
j between the lowest and the highest marginal productivities.
Possible uncertainty attaching to single methods of estimate
’ was resolved by the fact that tle different methods consistently
yrinted to the same conclusion. The methods of estimate and
; their results are listed and described below.
1. Water conservation expenses +
i There is some index to the marginal value of water :
; tt, che pains that water users take to conserve it. Let us take
the Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District, extending east from
; Lindsay and Strathmore to the foothills, as the prototype of
citrus water organizations, The following description applies
$
zs 5 _ ™ = ioe a pees ay ene gk Ril tel aki “woes te a oe oe “ oe a4
| -7- |
; ns iod before Its acute water shor tage was relieved by —-- —— =
: to the per
: che deus ex machina of the Central Valley Project. . qi
i This district pumps water up over 200 feet from the river af
a co the top of its system (a cost, as we shall see, imposed not -
by nature but by water law). It distributes water in steel
pipe under pressure throughout its area, 80 that sprinklers | 5
4 ray be used. It operates a surface and an underground res- i
. ervoir and has the necessary excess distributive capacity to . cf
f
serve water on demand so that operators need apply water only H
when the trees require it. It has withal one of the most ab
: elaborate water conservation systems of any Irrigation District ,
in the State, a fact reflected in persistently high tax rates i
¢
and wavex totls: in 1949, $6.79 per assessed acre and $8.14 ie
per delivered acre-foot.’
By contrast, the Tulare Irrigation District (around Tulare f:
; in the southwestern Kaweah Delta) loses some 50% of the water i
i ic diverts through a long unlined ditch.® When it finally fs
, j
y Coxputed from State of California, Dept. of Public Works, |:
; Division of Water Resources, Irrigation Districts in Cali- i,
fornia, 1944-1950, Bul. No. 21-P, (Sacramento: State i:
Printing Office, nd). In 1929 the District Charged $24.50 i -
per acre and $10 per acre-foot. State of California, Dept. t
of Public Works, Div. of Water Resources, Permissible Annual I
i Ch:rges for Irrigation Water in the Upper San Joaquin Valley, ts
: .uiletin No, 34 (Sacramento: State Printing Office, 1930), t.
; pr. 65, Table 39, bs
Adams, Frank, Irrigation Districts in California, State of |
California, Dept. of Public Works, Division of Engineering t:
and Irrigation, Bulletin No. 21 (Sacramento: State Printing ie
Office, 1929), p. 247. it
}
; ~8-
i] trict, ". . .the use of water is very ununiform AL.
SET TT Eee i nen nee ee eee cee oe i bs
j and generally wasteful" observed Frank Adams in an William
Horn, in studies preliminary to the 1955 Bulletin 2, “ete if
Y chis District the low overall “irrigation efficiency" of .39. 1
: Let me emphasize that neither Mr. Horn, Mr. Adams nor I are - i:
j necessarily levelling any witicism at the management of this
< Irrigation District. Its behavior may be perfectly rational
4 within the framework of water law. It is rather that framework
i trself which is under examination here, !2
jhe Tulare Irrigation District is not the worst example. |
: indeed it is, among our twenty-odd water users, one of those {,
Z -ore pressed for water, There is only one lined canal in the ti
te
entire Raweah system (Foothill Ditch in the thermal zone). gs:
" : 2
: Kusteful rotation systems of water distribution are the rule. et
4 , |
}
7 State of California, Dept. of Engineering, Irrigation Districts :
in California, 1881-1915, Bulletin No. 2 (Sacramento: State oF
rinting Office, ¢. 1916), p. 88 a
'
q ae State of California, Water Resources Board, Water Utilization
. -@ Reauirements of Califormmia, Bul. No. 2, Vol. 1. (Sacramento:
; tite Printing Office, 1955).
il a
Correspondence in writer's files. -
,
j 2 “essrs. Horn and Adams are not implicated, of course.
5
1
i
1 .
us - 4
- 9 - J
“Ga marginal costs of lifting ground water _

The marginal cost of lifting ground water in individual
pumped wells is an excellent guide to marginal productivity, since -
{ndividuals are in a position of complete control wherein they ee
can pursue the natural tendency to equate private marginal cost
and marginal revenue product. .

The Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District, like much of the
thermal citrus zone, is underlain by very poor aquifers, Lifts :
had increased to over 150 feet before 1920, 15 and costs were
higher even than that would suggest because the underlying rock 3
imposed high drilling costs and low yields per we11, 14 From 4
about 1913, many wells struck connate brines with boron, toxic :
to citrus. !°

By contrast, along the lower reaches of the St. Johns River, “
(the northern distributary of the Kaweah,) between Goshen and }
Traver, ground water has damaged the soil by intermittently evapor- j
ating from the surface, and is not far down today. 16 °

i 13 State of California, Dept. of Public Works, Division of Engi-
; neering and Irrigation, Water Resources of Tulare County and
their Utilization, Bulletin No, 3 (Sacramento: State Printing -
Office, 1922), Map No. l.
14 Hearings on S, 912 before Senate Public Lands Subcommittee, 80th nN
' Congress, Ist Session, 1947, p. 636.
15 rid., p. 400
16 Althouse, Irvin H., "Water Requirements of Tulare County’) Re-
port to Tulare County Board of Supervisors, January, 1942
F (mimeo.), p, 13.
E Weir, Walter W., Transactions of the American Geophysical Union,
: 1941, cited in U. S. Dept. of Agri., Bureau of Agri. Econ.,
i "San Joaquin Valley Water Investigations, Agricultural Aspects",
; (Berkeley, 1944,) p. 149.
aie oO ee es atte, i A hia. <vetiial Rais ” ‘
Po sf :, ig
: . - 10 - ;
; - Despt te this accessible water table, there is little pumping, = ~~
due to poor soils.!/ A large amount of Kaweah water is none-
theless consigned to the area each year, under vested rights in ;
surface diversion and channel seepage. In most of the Kaweah
delta area over the period of study, pump lifts averaged less ;
than 25'. Only in the southwestern delta were lifts much
8
greater. ;
3, Water applied per acre :
Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District was forced by 4
unfavorable court judgements to subsist for many years on 1.76 q
acre-feet per acre.?9 Even to achieve this depth it had to .
20 d
halve its acreage. 4
As the cther extreme, the Consolidated Peoples’ Ditch Company x
i rean annual diversion over 36 years has been about 7 acre-feet <
£ :
5 per acre,“t plus whatever may be lifted by private pumps from P
a
3 shallow wells after July when the river usually runs dry. |
4 a
Es ee ¢
17 U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Agricultural Eco- j
nomics Division of Land Economics, Water Utilization Section,
‘Area Proposal, Kaweah-Tule Area, California", September, 1941, ‘
p. 7.
¢ 18 Note 13, supra; and U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, Central
; Valley Basin, Senate Document 113, 8lst Congress, lst Session,
4 1945, Plates 4-6 facing p. 104. .
$ 19 gegen of Donald Burr, Manager, Lindsay-Strathmore I.D.,
58,
i 20 Kerr, S. A., in Hearings on S. 912..... supra (Note 14), p. 390.
, :
1 Computed from Kaweah River Flows....., supra (Note 6), Table
: 8. Cf, Permissible Annual Charges....., supra (Note 7), p. 81,
‘ on the lavish use of water by irrigators in the Kaweah Delta,
| -1- |
WP Lee me repeat that it is physically possible to shift water
from Consolidated Peoples’ Ditch Company to Lindsay~Strathmore
Irrigation District without cost, simply by changing the point
of diversion. The only barrier is legal. Lindsay-Strathmore
Irrigation District was prepared to make the shift in 1928,
having bought shares in Consolidated Peoples’ Ditch Company
and an easement in Foothill Ditch, and was stopped only by
injunction. 724
4. Value of output per acre-foot
We all know of course that the average revenue product ;
per acre-foot is not the marginal revenue product. But it is “
a near relative, so that differences as great as those recorded 7
here, especially in conjunction with the other data, are worth
noting. In fact, the use of average products understates the :
contrast of marginal productivities, probably a good deal,
since thirstier areas are nearer the stage of increasing aver-
age returns to water, and some are in that stage. 4
| The Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigi tion District, before the ad-
vent of Central Valley Project water, grossed something like ,
35,000,000 per year? from 16,400 acre-feet per year, or about -
} 718 Consolidated Peoples’ Ditch Company v. Foothill Ditch
Company 205 Calif. 54, 269 Pac. 915 (1928). —t—i‘C:™*W
| 22 Adapted from data compiled under supervision of Wm. Taggart,
U, S. Bureau of Reclamation, Sacramento; from Annual Reports
of Tulare County Agricultural Commissioner; and several con-
tributing sources,
Fs
| ~4z-. |
~~ 4300 per acré-foot: ~ Consolidated -Peeples'Diteh-Company,-1.. is
vould estimate, (exact figures are not compiled) grossed in
the rough neighborhood of $2,000, 000 from its 66,000 acre-feet, :
_ or Little more than 10% as much per acre-foot,
: If we go by crops instead of area, we can deduct current 2
; variable costs (i.e. cultural and harvest costs) and arrive at
: a more significant figure. Costs are higher for navels, of qq
i course, and that reduces their advantage, but leaves it still F
¥ > tepressive. The average net product of water applied to navels, i
at current levels of prices and costs, would run from $200-$500 :
an acre-foot compared to around $40 for cotton, $20 for alfalfa,
$20 for barley, and $10 for pasture. 2? r
. In the long run the advantage of navels would be still less H
because of their long development period and heavy fixed costs. 2
# Sut for our present purpose the short run difference is relevant. fi
{ :vy in the Kaweah area it was not just raw citrus land that was 7
: vi.icd water for the benefit of downstream barley and pasture. :
F It was also established citrus groves, with fixed costs already i
4 sunk, The economic pressure that water law has withstood is 7
the full difference in the short run values of water between :
; citrus and pasture. Ly
i _ Contrasting to the high yields and low water requirements of :
‘:trus, irrigated pasture grasses in the lower delta are little e
i "ore than domesticated phreatophytes. Irrigated pasture uses '
i b
. ost data supplied by Tulare County Farm Advisers, ts
: -13- |
- --zpout-five-acre-feet per acre. Michael Brewer has recently = $$
tabulated water cost as a percentage of all variable costs in
pasture operation. 24 He finds it to be 23%, a good deal more
than for cotton at 5%, Emperors at 2.7%, and event rice at 14.9%.
But this contrast, striking as it is, understates the full -
economic contrast a good deal because only explicit outlays are .
considered. No opportunity cost value is assigned to the water
itself, even though this may be the predominant social cost of
water use. If, in the Kaweah area, we were to charge against §
irrigated pasture an opportunity cost of about $15 per acre-foot, 7
there would remain no net return at all to other variable inputs, =
the operator or the equity. There would remain precious little
return to growers of barley and alfalfa. These crops can be i
grown here only because water law insulates their growers from i
feeling the social cost of water as a personal cost. 4
5. Production response to increased water supply ,
From 1952, the Central Valley Project brought a prodi- i
gious increment to the area's water supply. According to Tulare
County Agricultural Commissioner reports, the response of navel az
output was immediate and continuing. Tulare County navel yields
for 1952-58 are about double those for 1943-51, and the division -
between 1951 and 1952 is clean and sharp. By way of a control,
| 24 Brewer, Michael, "Water Pricing and Allocation with Particu-
lar Reference to California Irrigation Districts", Giannini
Foundation Mimeographed Report No, 235, 1960, p. 84.
=e NT Renee re eees oe an es ia eras eat aie
. oe - 14-

— = in neighboring Fre sno County, where navels received no new 2 ——~O
Central Valley Project water, there was no significant change
in yields between the two periods. _ 7 :

Crops grown in the middle and lower delta--plums, alfalfa
and walnuts--show no increased yields after 1952 (cotton is not
used as an example because its intermittent acreage control
program overshadowed other factors influencing yields). :
6. Land-value response to increased water supply ;
In the thermal citrus zone, access to a reliable water 4
supply today is worth something in the neighborhood of $500-$800
an acre. This is the difference in the price of raw land with
and without water. Dry land, of which there is ample, would ;
bring some $50-$100 an acre based on grazing income. Water :
y raises this to $500-$900. Access to water is not free, but i
F entails annual land taxes and water tolls of some $30 an acre, ‘
f and the land value increment is based on expected income net of §&
F othese charges. 7° E.
} This index is inflated by today's high land prices, based in
part on speculative anticipations that may be unwarranted. Ten :
years ago the figure was less than half today's, and ten years an
hence, in my opinion, it will be that low again, or lower, due "
to overexpansion of water-supply and related land-development . z
projects, 2° Still it contrasts sharply with the lower delta, ;
25 Interviews with local realtors and water officials, 1958. See ..
also Hearings on S. 912..., supra (Note 14), pp. 654-55,
26 See Section IV, infra. .
iC ois ell ee nn nla tabi Raa ie iri tetii bein ss ~
al \

- 15 - ;
—_ where 1 t is difficult to find evidence of any land value incre- =~ J

ment related to increased water supply, and for our present pur- ;

pose it is the contrast, not the absolute quantity, that is 4
important. - ;

7. Willingness to pay for water and water rights |
Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District before 1935 had 4

bought, and downstream interests had sold shares in most of the |
Ditch Companies in the Kaweah Delta, despite the high risk (which. 4

came to pass) that Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District could 4
never use them. Consistently thwarted in her quest for water, q
Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District just as consistently put 4

up whatever money seemed necessary to get it some other way. 4

In 1949 when the Irrigation Districts' Association sought to ¥

* maintain a united front in bargaining with the Bureau of Rec-
lamation, it was Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District which q
first broke ranks and consented to a contract with several un- :

iy popular features. By contrast the lower delta ditch companies ;

, have never even organized as Irrigation Districts to contract ;
for Bureau water, The Kaweah Delta Water Conservation District,
representing the whole delta, is unwilling to pay the Bureau's 7
prices, ;

|

f

i
ee, ais _ " inlet 4a = PETE Ee ‘ este: Ce ge yee ee aL i a itis m4
- 16 - | j
if
gs Competent appraisals of soils and climate =o ==—<i‘“‘“S;CO;O™:*CSCir
The excellence of the benchlands in soils and climate
iq
ig documented in sources cited in the appended footnote.2/ :
parts of the lower delta also have excellent soils, but the
thermal qualities of the benchlands suit them for much more pro- |
ductive uses of water, ; -
. 9. Size of farms F
In Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District almost all the oF
| land is in unusually small and intensive farms, averaging about if
15 acres.-° At that size clearly the operator is in sore need “4
S to spread his overhead over as much output per acre as possible, ‘4
He is likely to have on hand underutilized indivisible input i
items to maxe’the fullest use of marginal water at the least mar- ¥
; ginal associated cost. tg
. b-.
go 7
5 ty
: hy
27 USDA Bureau of Agr. Economics, "San Joaquin Valley Water In- ra
vestigations, Agricultural Aspects", (Berkeley: 1944), Mimeo, “
3 A Report to the War Dept. U. S. Engineers Office, Sacramento .-. :.
re District, {made of public record by introduction by Paul ;
Johnstone in testimony at Hearings on S. 912. . ., supra ;
(Note 14) p. 842/, Table 19, p. is Table 24, p. 60; Table 39, ¢
pp. 108-09 ;
USDA Bureau of Agricultural Economics, "Area Proposal, Kaweah- _
Tule Area, California", supra (Note 17), pp. 7 ff.
Althouse, Irvin H., op. cit. (Note 16), pp. 12, 96-97. é
oe:
f U. S. Dept. of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, "Factual Re- t
: port, Tulare Irrigation District", (Fresno: 1949), mimeo. :
; 28 U. S. Dept. of Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, "Factual Re- [t
port, Lindsay-Strathmore I.D." (Fresno: 1949), Mimeo, '
H
i?
i:
|
ac iia itil tt lh nts tO a BE a pitlinmi sae ta dain Matsa on. -
. -17- |
fh... powhere else in the delta are farms nearly 80 small PF i
. B. Unreliability of water supply |
- A common rationalization for rigidity of water allocations, A
and unresponsiveness to demands, is that this is simply the price :
we must pay for security and stability of supply. But this ar- -
| gument will not bear much weight in the Kaweah River situation, :
since the division of waters is such as to increase materially :
the system's aggregate variability over what it might be; and
the allocation of the burden of variability among different users ;
is such as to deprive a needlessly large share of the diverted :
water of much of its value, as will be shown directly. i
It is natural to think that irregularity of irrigation water KN
supply must reflect irregularity of demand, but such is not the A
case in the Kaweah system. Demand plays no part in timing de- a
: liveries, Diversions are regulated by an iron-bound schedule
B based exclusively on rates of flow in the river. Demand must 3
adjust to the supply so determined, .
1, Aggregate variability in the system , 4
Nature imposes a certain variability on water supply, ;
which man can reduce only by physical means, i.e. storage, But . '
he can increase it, when dividing the supply among many claimants, [
; by the counter-movement of diversions. That is, if one diversion {
rises as another falls there is new variability introduced in i
__ i
. 29 Clawson, Marion, and Wilson, Edwin E., "Agricultural Land
Ownership and Operation in the Southern San Joaquin Valley",
USDA Bureau of Ag. Econ., (Berkeley: 1945), Mimeo.
!
4 - 18 - :
fe che-system. Or if the diversions change disproportionately (even. :
though perfectly correlated) there is a sort of increased varia-
pility introduced, if we define and measure "variability" in
such a way (as I think we should) that deviations are weighted
- in step with their magnitudes (e.g. by squaring them).
For this purpose the variance divided by the mean makes an
appropriate measure. For annual flows from 1920-55 this figure
. for the sum of all diversions was 63,016 acre-feet. This repre-
| sents the variability which nature imposed on that portion of the
: river which man diverted, But the sum of the corresponding q
| figures for the individual diversions was 98,050 acre-feet, or .
56% more.” Thus, man's division of the waters added, by this 4
measure, 56% to the burdens imposed by nature .>+ a
| Three user-organizations actually received supplies which r
4 were less steady than wasted flood waters, i.e. Kaweah River i
é rlows in excess of diversions. This hardship is clearly un- 8
necessary, and is imposed by the system on junior appropriators "
i to the benefit of no one. s
2. Distribution of variability among water-users j
System variability is very unequally distributed. The :
steady portion of the flows, which is of course much the more L -
valuable share, goes to a few. In general, these are the same
: which get the heavier per acre mean annual supplies. e
ae
30 Computed from Kaweah River Flows . . ., supra, (Note 6).
31 une percentage increase is greater in the summer months, which ;
y far the more important ones. Exact figures on this,
a however, have been derailed in a vacuum tube deep in the bowels
4 meeting and could not be located in time for this |
- ai ee et dons iii A atielrta nalts asa heenlntat a nies casein Mcahiciniin,
a ,
-19- ©
- ~——~"FRe result is that few-acres receive water supplies that are-——— :
|; adequate in poth quantity and reliability. To give some quanti-
] tative measure of this I have improvised a "coefficient of re- ;
ie Liability" defined as Atf.l + (coefficient of variation) /,
. This is not the best such coefficient that human ingenuity might
, devise, but is frankly a Rube Goldberg gadget which simply corres-
ponds to ay intuitive evaluation of the importance of steadiness |
in water supply. I will rise to defend it against simple mis- :
: understanding or sandbagging, but gladly abandon it to a better
: alternative. 4
After adjusting mean annual supplies with this coefficient
the acres getting adequate water supply are seen to be much less :
than they could be. |
i 89,500 acres get some Kaweah surface water. Mean annual flows i]
could supply them nearly four acre-feet per acre. Multiplying {
: by the coefficient of reliability for the River this becomes it
1.13 adjusted acre-feet per acre, But, due to the unequal dis- i
tribution of water and steadiness, the acreage receiving that }
good a supply or better is only 29,000. These acres receive very i
good supplies indeed, But they are only 32% of the acres (89,500) "
that might receive that good a supply. 7
When we consider further that the 29,000 acres for whose bene-
Ps fit the others are deprived do not include the best combinations
x of soil and climate, we have a notion of the undeveloped poten- :
: tial in the Kaweah River. :
‘
it
oe Me = * a sar ft aed dnc meh . ™ haan i et iz ™ : _ et fs ree t toe! ie + sere Aare -
: | ; 2 20 - P
— ioe ¢. Excess diversion capacity” ™ OE ‘-
F A third important diseconomy in the system is excessive
4 diversion capacity. One would expect this from the excessive
4 aggregate variability discussed above, but there is more excess ;
q than that accounts for. With few exceptions, ditch diversion 4
. capacity far exceeds all recorded diversions except perhaps
; one--one day in 36 years--and that one diversion apparently 4
1 undertaken in the hope of stretching and/or nailing down a :
: claim to water. . ,
; The sum of all diversion capacities is 4740 second-feet, > B
@ =or 2.2 times the peak of the sum of all diversions reached on
: June 4, 1952, °° and 11.5 times the mean diversion. :
a
5 D. Excess canal mileage 4
z Excess canal mileage is one of the more conspicuous dis- :
¥ Z
HI eeonomLes in the Kaweah system. Probably over two-thirds of 4
4 it could be dispensed with in a compact integrated system. I
ih
;  hwve not tried to demonstrate this directly, The indirect
%%
5 evidence happens to be easier to marshal, and it suffices.
! 32 Go, :
3 Computed from Kaweah River Flows .. ., supra, (Note 6). q
4 4
y 3 June 4, 1952, is not necessarily the all-time peak of the
5 Sum of diversions, The task of computing this series daily
for 36 years was beyond my resources, But this was cer-
tainly near the all-time peak, and far above the normal
annual peak,
| i
4 | ; - 21-
qo 7p. Scattered service area |
The 89,500 acre Kaweah service area is strewn over
about 440,000 acres, or five times as much land, which is con-
F ‘tained within the perlmeter of service.?* Some of the bypassed
| lands are poor, but some are very good, and better than those
geccing service, and in general the scatter cannot be ration- 7
alized as an effort to apply limited water to better soils.
: Neither is it an effort to bring surface water where underground |
water is costly, for there is clearly no such pattern. It is ;
a heedless, haphazard scatter reflecting random historical §
| forces now frozen tight.
: 2, Overlapping service areas 4
, Shares of the separate ditch companies have traded 4
# freely over the area and reached the sort of reductio ad :
3 absurdum that might be lampooned in an elementary text to dra- i
: matize the inevitability of monopoly in public utilities, but {
which one hardly expects to meet face to face, 4
4 Only 12,000 acres are actualty served by two or more com- .
i panies, but the company service areas are now scattered among
i each other most intricately, so that there is much overlapping ‘
@ of the areas within service perimeters, The sum of the areas
d within the service perimeters of the separate companies is i
‘ 356,000 acres, or four times. the net area served (89,500 acres).
| 34 Computed from Kaweah River Flews . . ., supra (Note 6), map |
in back pocket, 7
as
-22- |
~ “one” company, the Wutchumna Water Company, its so scattered that’
it serves only 11% of the lands within its perimeter. Five
other companies operate within this same area,>” .
3, Unintegrated ditches and cross-hauling 7
Many ditches in this system cross one another, some
of them two or three times. A most. conspicuous waste are the .
parallel ditches which work at cross purposes, carrying water
in opposite directions, or at least with significant contrary
vector components. For example, by long standing tradition
| (and court order) the River must be split 50-50 at McKay Point .
between the St. Johns, or northern distributary, and the ''Kaweah 4
Branch", or southern distributary. This division has behind :
it no rationale that I have discovered deeper than that there 4
is a ring of rough and ready justice to "fifty-fifty". The °
* productivity of and demand for water are greater in the south. i
i And so the Ketchum Ditch and Packwood Canal have been built to i
q curry St. Johns' water from below McKay Point back to the south- $
4 ern branch. The Tulare Irrigation District canal goes even K
farther north to tap the Wutchumna Ditch, whence it crosses both
branches (with the most sanitary precaution against interming-
ling) and proceeds many miles southwest to lands which could be 7
a served from one of the natural distributaries of the south branch, ;
‘
4
} ee
t
q
4
— a tia eRe estertlinin. + ok eae aeiiaiavets nal eas ental
: - 23 - |
I cameron Greek. fron this dane Wutchimne Blick the Lindsay- ~~
Strathmore pipeline carries water not only back southeast whence |
it came, but back up hill to lands that the water could reach ,
: by gravity via an existing aqueduct, Foothill Ditch. . :
E. Conveyance losses 7
The problem has at least two important dimensions. 7
: 1. Loss of elevation 7
From about elevations 650 feet down to 250 feet the 13
; Kaweah River falls freely. This drop could hardly be used F
| to generate power, but it could be used to move water southeast 4
. at high elevations. The gradient of marginal productivity a
rises rapidly to the southeast, and uphill, so this would be a 29
very productive use of the elevation. This valuable elevation ,
4 is completely dissipated in the process of moving water through i

E the present system to low lands that could be served by imported im
| northern waters--if waters must be imported--much more cheaply FH

‘ tian the higher and more southerly lands. rk

' 2. Channel seepage uy
Both the natural and artificial channels pass over i

. porous materials and lose large fractions of their flow to -
5 the underground, Much of this water is later pumped and used, i
3 but it still represents significant loss. 4
} First, much of it percolates in the wrong places, e.g. the +
4 lower St. Johns channel, where ground water is too high already

: and the marginal productivity is zero. And once it has sunk

: it becomes subject to the paramount rights of overlying land- i

! owners and is very difficult to export. H

4 i
pasties iiss: 4 —. atthe ee Pe ee ee ee
| - 24 - ; ;
~~ Second, much of Lt percolates at the wrong time, that fs in ~ oO ;
summer when pumps are busy lifting water from the ground res-
ervoir and surface delivery of this seepage water would save a 4
. needless round trip. - ;
F. Inadequate use of the ground reservoir ;
: 1. Storage use E
Below the surface of the Kaweah delta lies a resource ts
that is comparable in value to the River itself, viz. a large 3
=: underground storage reservoir in coarse gravel that is notable . ly
for ease of recharge and withdrawal, especially toward the apex ig
f of the cone. Like the River the reservoir has high location |
‘ value, because in this area storage, like water, is scarce.
7 Neither the Kaweah nor the neighboring Tule has a large and Ei
? cconomical site for surface storage, and ground storage south :
* znd especially southeast from the Kaweah delta is poor. 6 os
* Clearly this ground storage should be filled in spring and 4
7 crawn down in summer to regulate the flow. if
} But many overlying landowners have strong rights in surface {
j water, So hardly need the ground water. And the reservoir can- if
q not be used for the benefit of other lands, California law t -
allows only "surplus" waters to be exported from a ground water * fe
3 basin, and in this area exports have been enjoined. Even if i
| 36 Gardner, Wm., testimony at Hearings on S. 912... ., supra, i
4 (Note 15), p. 417. if
|
‘ ;

. - 25 -

q tne "foreign" Land holder supplies his own water by artificial :
be recharges wishing only to use the reservoir, he cannot, be- ;
; cause the natural and artificial waters commingle underground. o 7
3 When he withdrew the equivalent of what he had "deposited" in :
: this bank it would include some natural water, thereby threat- :
7 ening to establish a prescriptive right which overlying owners - sei =
a would be bound to enjoin. ” a

7 The Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District did, it is true, &
4 operate a well-fleld in this area for several years up to 1952, *
B® tut was forced finally to discontinue. It had only enough bar- P
gaining power to get consent to continue its use until Central =
4 Valley Project water became available. Even this well-field ‘a
used only a small fraction of the underground reservoir capa- “3
4S city. . 3
i 2. Permanent recharge a
‘ In some areas in recent years, recharge of aquifers ri
».suld have been desirable. One of the most productive uses of i
;  ¥tker often is to submerge it permanently to support the water 4
4 tuble and reduce pump lifts. In aquifers of 10% water-holding na

ie capacity, for example, one acre-foot per acre should raise
ts pump lifts 10 feet, worth about $1.50 a year if three acre- *
. fect per acre are pumped. A dollar and a half a year at 5% .
r vuuld be worth $30, an exceedingly rough figure, but suggestive ‘
3 vf the order of values involved. ?°4 if
' Preliminary studies by Edward Renshaw at the Giannini Found- Ad
| ation appear to yield comparable figures. #
q - 26 - |
| —~"Recharge has not proceeded as fast as it should. -The- 9
Tulare Irrigation District, interested in recharge, could
i not or did not pick up enough water from other organizations. |
; The Kaweah Delta Water Conservation District, whose primary :
{ physical function is recharge, has acquired no water rights of r
4 tes own whatever. ‘
i A prime cause is the scattering of irrigated farms among dry :
7 farms in the area. Not only are organizational service areas ig

scattered, as described above, but pump-irrigated land is sim- q
; “jarly interspersed with dry-farmed land over a wide area,>! ‘4
| Tnis pattern of course multiplies the volume of water that must
be sunk underground to support water tables beneath the irri- a!
-tated acreage, and no doubt helps to make uneconomical an oper- it
a ation that would, with compact development of irrigation, often oF
: be fcasible, 7
Corresponding to inadequate recharge is the problem of ex- :
4 cossive withdrawal. The individual pumper feels no constraint ¢
3 to economize on ground water anu accordingly treats it as a free id

good, ‘
G. Inadequate reuse of water f -
The early diversions from the Kaweah, which today have i
t fixed priorities based on historical use as well as privileged #
. viperian status, were largely made at lower elevations, toward ;
——a
7 Water Resources of.Tulare County . . ., supra, (Note 13),
x Map I Althouse, Irvin H., Supra (Note 16), map in back pocket.
ee '
‘
Ce ate ee . ar sas tats oe ce a ect belek IE oe itn
oo” all ies
- i ”
OO - 27 < i HE.

_the bottom ofthe. system, —Water-se-applied- drains out of the ~~ ————

system with less reuse than if it were applied initially on My
the higher bench lands, 7 i:
Hy . -
H. Segregation of the Kaweah from small local streams | “
ay?
There are several small intermittent streams nearby the i eee
Kaweah, whose flows aggregate some 20% of the Kaweah's, Gen- i “
erally, the smaller a stream the less reliable its flow, so i aa
these waters are largely unusable. | eae
It is interesting to note, however, that these intermittent : 33
waters could be made usable by integration with the Kaweah, oy
materially augmenting the area's usable water supply. They rise alee
from much lower watersheds than the Kaweah, so their patterns rE
of flow are different, tending to offset each other and the ie
Kaweah. When all the flows are aggregated, in fact, the coef- : ip -
ficient of variation of the combined flows is little greater i
than for the Kaweah alone, °° This benefit would flow simply i
from applying the principle of pooling offsetting risks. How- . wee
ever, it has not been done. Rather, as we have seen in II, B, : a
the contrary: the Kaweah itself is unpooled, split up in such 7 Ps
a way as to create more risk, regressing from Nature rather Bi -
than improving on her. L, a
38 .52 for the Kaweah and .54 for the combined flows. The a
coefficients of variation for the small streams taken indi- a
vidually run around .75-.80. Computed from data for 1890- a or
1940 in Althouse, Irvin H., op cit. supra (Note 16). ) os
iq...
:
Se eter ippinediiens ONT ereaaae crys SOR age EP
ye or a ee ea canes
; " ] 4
sm |
~~ "Py "Segregation of the Kaweah from the Kings River Al
Integration of the Kaweah with its larger northern i ke
neighbor, the Kings, has been recommended by most students of | RC
WI} =
the area of an engineering or economic orientation. These in- ~ | i“
clude Irvin Althouse, >” a leading engineer of Tulare County; | 4
the California Division of Water Resources in its original | ie
plans for the Central valley; * and more recently the Bureau BE
of Reclamation.“ Some of the advantages would be: pa
1. The Kings River has abundant cheap surface storage (at ‘3
Pine Flat), which could be used to firm up the Kaweah, thus a
indirectly helping to regulate the latter, 1
2. The Kings has a relative water surplus, and its present i
service area is much cheaper to reach from the north if more . a
supplies are to be imported. F
3, The Kings could serve much of the Kaweah delta by gravity, I.
releasing Kaweah water for export southeastward at high eleva- 5
tions into the zone of highest marginal productivity. The —
Friant-Kern canal could have been shortened into a “Kaweah ~ : Le
south" canal and its cross-section could have been reduced by t.
utilizing some elevation to increase the very low gradient, ‘a -
39 op. cit. supra (Note 16), p. 97
40 Bailey, Paul, Water Resources of California, State of Califor- 7
nia, Dept. of Public Works, Division of Engineering and Irri- :
gation, Bul. No. 9 (Sacramento; State Printing Office, 1925), a ca
Plate IV facing p. 10. az .
4. Central Valley Basin, supra (Note 18), p. 132. . ,
2 ae cea aitaiaiect 2 aM ag sees, were er ‘o) REE? Teor iets oe Sates SR Te ;
—ee |
| presently just six inches per mile, These measures would [
. have greatly reduced its high cost, which was incurred by.
te 4
naintaining elevation through the rough foothills between the ~ i
W osan Joaquin and the Kings. *? | ;
These net gains waited upon getting some flexibility into od
water allocations. They still wait. Not only was local enter- 7 3
prise blocked, but even when outside benefactors, the State and 3
the Nation, offered to cover most of the expenses, the obstacles ;
. 2
of water law proved insurmountable, 7
|
- |
. 4
# ;
2 f |
- ¥ {
f
| 7
| |
bo
42 Boke, Richard, testi t Hearings on S. 912 -
’ 2 e mony a earin On o. Flé . +. «=, Supra a
(Note 14), p. 661. HEATINES © Supra 7
euch ~ _— . ory oe aoa rere ce eee ne ene
: i
. BF a
- 30 - | zy
Oo
; 42a ie
The role of water law in imposing and perpetuating diseconomies A es
I have several times already alluded to the role of water law a
in the diseconomies described. The present section spells out i a
this relationship more systematically. Ba
A
otk
1 ie
A. Productivity not the initial basis of water rights eae:
The State has never allocated its valuable waters by put- 7 a
ting a rental on their use, neither has it ever sold licenses fs
Na)
or titles to the highest bidder. Rather it has followed a mix- Hoe
ture of methods whose rationale bears little apparent relation- pee
ship to marginal productivity. § ice
Agen
1. Riparian rights Ua |
i = ee
Riparian rights are limited, as we all know, to lands a « net
fronting on natural channels. The Kaweah delta with its many ms. |
distributaries is endowed with more than the usual quota of as os
riparian lands. The Kaweah channels are unusually shallow, as R a
‘ell as absorptive. Ground water gradients, therefore, slope bf , |
lowmn away from the channels, so that riparian lands in general i we
13 Seen foo
ave the easiest pump lifts and the least need of surface do :
Pe end
ater. Thus riparian rights attach surface waters to the lands f te
yat need them least. | aan
Pr
3 Y am indebted to Thomas Crocker for assistance in research ;
for this section, and to Professor Fred Mann for tolerant he
legal counsel.
I
tee inne a PT EL OTE Le OE Rt nn tee, ete
i - . 31 - .
2. Appropriative rights i
d Appropriative rights, as we all also know, are based :
; on priority of use and ranked by seniority. Rights become |
i appurtenant to lands in the order that they are developed for Ad
i {rrigation. 4
q Now the supersession of lands from less to more intensive 1
uses in our society has almost never proceeded orderly-wise, |:
q in compact increments, and irrigation use is no exception, i
q The more diligent early irrigators are sprinkled among dry ;
4 farmers, and their appropriative rights the same, so that con- a
{ veyance costs are excessive. ag
a Early appropriative rights are not necessarily biassed toward ih.
: better soils, since dry-farmers on these are under less pressure :
i than those on poor soils to augment their incomes, and are -
3 sore typically holdouts against innovations like irrigation. .
j Early rights are biassed, however, toward soils and locations Li
‘ ‘etter suited to quick-development crops, uses like hay or
' erain, The slower evolving user with high per-acre capital H
4 requirements, like orchards, tend to join the race too late to .
; get good water, even though they ultimately develop higher mar- [:
ginal productivities than the fast starters. Thus it is that tf .
: the citrus zone has such inadequate water rights. Not only is MN
. land development slow, but extension of ditches to serve these ;
: higher lands requires more capital and a longer development it
4 period. The earliest pioneers were short on the capital and 7
: organization for such projects, i!
{ i
‘ tt
aes a ie , ate Sa ath ere wenete. ‘ 4 sas ake cae ata ‘ Se aA x
| - 32 - | :
: worst of all, the appropriative system puts a premium on are
excessive and wasteful diversions. Even before that the “doctrine
: of relation", which bases priorities on the date of first claim
: rather than first use, puts a premium on premature and inflated
7 claims, which are a source of enervating uncertainty. But when
the chips are down, the courts have generally fallen back on
1 histories of diversion as the ultimate basis for prorating scarce if
q waters. The individual's incentive is, therefore, to divert 4
water whether he needs it or not. It is the accepted means of
staking a claim for the future. F
: Thereby a cost to society--withdrawing water--is made a rev- Lg
it enue to the appropriator. Where water was superabundant this a
: may onee have served some useful function in accelerating devel- is
© .pment. Now when water has become’ scarce it would be hard to '
. .untrive a more perverse arrangement.
: 3. Correlative rights
. In California rights to percolating ground water are
2 called "Correlative", They have no statutory basis but are "
4 based on court traditions and judgements. Land overlying an .
; aquifer is treated analogously to land riparian to a stream, i
; and correlative rights are limited to these overlying lands. :
; "Surplus" waters may be exported, but the meaning of "surplus" .
, is for a court to decide in each case and on the Kaweah, despite ‘
i the situations described in II, A, above, the courts have denied Hl
: permission to export ground water from acres of low to high z
: sarginal reyenue productivity. ‘|
| i
it
4 - 4
-33- : = as
bh] te
As mentioned above (II, F, 1) the prohibition'on exporting can
ground water also stops "foreign" land holders from using under- a
ground reservoirs. . 84
||
B. The initial pattern is frozen 1 Boxe
The initial pattern would be of limited concern if it could a
be altered to meet changing demands. But under prevailing water 1| a
laws, water users are insulated. from social opportunity costs. % b,
The State charges no economic rental for the use of its waters, : ide
or indeed any rental at all. The counties hardly tax water a Be
rights (unless held by rich outside cities). Nor is there much ip
appreciable implicit opportunity cost felt by the individual ae
because he cannot easily sell surplus waters even if he wants ie
to. The last point bears elaboration. a
1. Allegations of transferability
It is generally recognized that riparian and correlative i
rights are not transferable, but several writers have alleged fl
that appropriative rights are. S. T. Harding in 1936, seemingly -
in a glow of optimism over Peabody vs. Vallejo, +24 could write 1
that "economic pressure will eventually result in the available o
water supplies' being used where the greatest return will be |
secured", *> but this was little more than an expression of faith : -
and hope. Several other allegations of transferability ultimately t
42a 5 calif. (2d) 351, 40 pac. (24) 486 (1935)
43 Harding, Sidney T., Water Rights for Irrigation, supra (Note 4), ,
p. . .
i
Oe, ST Tl eT IEE STR IR ee oe Te
ir . . : eit 2 ey Eh 5 ag
7 7 | if .

- 34 - | a oo
ee
44 “fl ooo? =

trace back to a citation in Wells Hutchins” wherein he dis- | a

cusses some of the possibilities of and obstacles to transfer ; oss

in various states. But the discussion is purely legalistic en
A

with no purport of economic analysis or quantitative evaluation, | ng
| rae

and certainly should not be asked to bear much weight as a : H 8

{ oreees
demonstration that any significant volume of our water resources i eae
are effectively transferable in response to ordinary economic || ee:

Ho 8
pressures. To my knowledge there is no such general demonstra- qs
tion, but only a belief in some quarters that one exists, ABS:

2. Kinds of transfers achieved on the Kaweah a.
Certain limited kinds of water transfers actually have es

been effected in the Kaweah system. The most common kind is x. ee
the sale of shares in Mutual Water Companies. There has been Pe,
| Sa

an active and continuing market in these shares, among individ- a “s

uals and areas. In general, the movement has been in economical : i

directions, from north to south. Big buyers have been the 7 i

Irrigation Districts: The Lindsay-Strathmore, Tulare and “he

Corcoran, Biggest sellers have been shareholders in the Wut- aoe

chumna Water Company, which had an undoubted surplus, i.

phe

nr

5 oes

pS:

44 Hutchins, Wells, Selected Problems in the Law of Water Rights ff

in the West, USDA Misc. Publication No. 418 (Washington: on an
Government Printing Office, 1942) pp. 378 ff. ; _

7 on

{

i .
. Ro
- 35 - - be wt
| St
He
3. Uneconomic aspects of these transfers {| Meza
i ie
Transfer of water company shares has bemused several | ee
1] Ra
water economists recently as a means toward that workable water i weil,
market most of us would postulate as an ultimate goal.”> Unfor- . oan &
tunately, these are drawbacks to this type of transfer which F on es
severely narrow its potentiality, ‘| Cr
ia ee
a. Fixed point of diversion ar
The buyer of Mutual Water Company shares in California | “3S
must use the selling company's diversion works, however incon- i UPS
a ie va
venient. In 1928, Lindsay-Strathmore Irrigation District, hav- + | ees
ing bought shares in several downstream Mutual Water Companies, Ps pe.
+ [ee ',
sought to divert its share of their waters by gravity through he kaha 32
Foothill Ditch from a higher diversion point. The courts en- i TBAT
joined this, *° requiring Lindsay-Strathmore to let the water . : Wet ee
Zlow freely downhill to the Mutual Water Companies’ diversion ae
| ee .
vorks, tap onto the individual ditches below their heads, re- : a
oe oh
sather the waters and then pump them back uphill. These require- Feo
i pons:
ients precluded most of the transfers, and imposed extra costs a
*hich consumed much of the net benefits from the one such trans- ee
i ee
‘ex that was consummated (from Wutchumna Water Company). i AR oy .
a ace
t Bec
: whe
5 Anderson, Raymond L., "Operation of the Water Rental Market ta.
oR South Platte Basin", 42 JFE (5): 1501-03 (December, tbs A.
1960), vt:
, "The Irrigation Water Rental Market: | my,
a Case Study.” “Agricultural Economics Research 13 (2): Ae coe
54-58 (April, 1961). 1a
i Poo
6 Consolidated Peoples’ Ditch, Co. v. Foothill Ditch Co., 205 ibe.
Calif. 54, 269 Pac. 915 (1928),
7 | eae
- IES
Tulare Irrigation District, which lies below Wutchumna ex
Water Company, in order to divert its share has had to build iH
the long canal previously described, paralleling the Kaweah ARS:
Branch and crossing both branches to tap the Wutchumna Ditch i.
near Woodlake. : aa
Thus the Kaweah water distribution system has had to grow ! ee
physically in a manner analogous to the law itself, with one ee
principle hanging on another back to the ancient and ultimate : ioe
fountainheads of authority. It is questionable whether cir- ‘ a
cuitous transfers of this sort are desirable at all, even if aq
each individual operation shows a net gain. For as one ditch ' Pr
is tacked on to another, more and more interests become vested i #
in an increasingly absurd tangle, and the hope of rationali- 7 BF
zation recedes ever further into the realm of unattainable ff
visions. I
b. Short run inflexibility , I
The flexibility achieved by sale of shares is largely 7
long run. Within some areas there is some leasing, but between 7 a
companies it would usually be necessary to extend a ditch to f
effect a transfer. There is lacking a planned excess ditch | ; °
capacity such as is necessary to allow much flexibility. The | _—
process of transfer is slow and sticky, whereas demands fluc- .
tuate continually and to a degree unpredictably. ;
. ;
,
. $
ined Sey eyo, ak 0 + 2 : %
. - pire!
~~" Deconsolidation of service areas) ittsti—‘is;~*~™S : ie
Individuals selling shares give little heed to the dag
overall effect on distribution costs, so the company service i ig
areas are shot full of holes, resulting in the pattern of scat~ | By
tered and overlapping service areas noted above. (II, D). may
d. Limited area of transfer we
The transferability of Mutual Water Company shares | eo
is limited to the Kaweah delta area, Areas of higher marginal f oe
productivity outside the delta cannot get Kaweah water this d a
way (or any other way). This point was decisively settled by i ie
the out-of-court treaty closing the "17-years war" against cam
Lindsay-Strathmore. While this one persistent district was f <
finally vouchsafed an interim supply until Central Valley [ ef:
Project water should arrive, there was clearly no hope for a
other citrus lands, none of whose owners have since found the he
temerity to try to tap the Kaweah, ne
4. Kinds of transfers blocked i on
Other types of voluntary transfer have been blocked i en
almost completely. } re
a. Riparian rights | ie .
Riparian rights in California are "part and parcel" ' Ae.
of land and transferable only by extinction. The same holds for 4 os
Mutual Water Company shares based on riparian rights.

Riparian rights are not good for storage. If a riparian | SS ;
claimant wants to store water he can do so only by filing as |. a
a junior appropriator and taking his place at the end of the | ve

1 .
boa . ° -~ rej
sf .
- “x Wheel
- . | 4 Lhe
line. Since the Kaweah is all "claimed up" this would avail Eee
him nought, and if he sought to put water at the end of the ES
line by abandoning his riparian claim he would find this water cre@
is) SSS
completely swallowed up in the inflated claims of-prior appli- AES
ants. , f uy
cants } ep
A riparian, therefore, has little choice but to insist on i ee ok
1} (eee s
t eek anv
maintenance of the natural flows he can claim and use them Fes
SAS
without any storage regulation. Transfer of these waters to # aS
storage is legally impossible, in the normal course of events. pa
b. Correlative rights i iS
Like riparian rights these are completely non- t ry.
an ee
transferable. . Se
an | ace
c. Appropriative rights | ee
i v4.
The basic legal presumption is that appropriative |
rights are transferable, and sometimes they have been trans- |
ferred. But there are many hurdles to cross which, in their i a
. i$ . .
cumulative effect in the Kaweah area, have the effect of com- :
plete prohibition, a
(1) Uncertainty of tenure “ be
An appropriator does not "own" a water right. | + : ;
lhe .
He has a permit or a license to use the State's water. Appro- a
priators would like to have these licenses regarded as firm a
property rights, and in part they have succeeded, but only in | .
part. The law is equivocal, now asserting the State's owner- |
ship, now deferring to the licensees’ "property" rights, and ;
fi
— My te.
- ane

| - 39 - | ‘ “s
‘in the last analysis will no doubt, like Mr. Dooley's Supreme Bae
Court, follow the election returns. Meantime: appropriative . wes
rights are left hanging in a tenuous limbo, the judicial re- . : ek
flection of public schizophrenia. ~~ | red
The appropriators' position rests on a kind of mystic philos- ae
ophy that value is entirely created by use, a mystique that — i os
will not bear analysis and 80 must deny much of the rationalism i eee
associated with the commercial revolution, This mystique is ; | ae:
roughly violated, and the acquiescent public outraged, by the i £3 4
spectacle of licensees "trafficking" in their privileges and i page
neasuring them in the balance with something so profane as 4 Peo
a8 | te aoe
noney. i if
a | See

Some of this attitude rubs off on the licensees themselves, “ pee
sany of whom put water rights in a class with family heirlooms 7 aa
and heap social disapproval on any of their number who would ol pee
sell, the more so because publicity attending sales at high | a
osrices might weaken the already shakey position of licensees ‘ oa
jenerally, expose them to regulation, taxation, or royalty es
charges, and rouse opposition to their receiving subsidized: | TES
ceservoir services from Federal agencies. And so there is.a i won -

itrong bias against commerce in appropriative rights. By its i hoe
cature the relative strength. of this factor is impossible to ! ao
| Sepp

Bo

| is
i _ * :
Oo 7 . _ a , te - ' oe ee Cg bc hs, ae re
nt Beige ee ee ee ae DS ce, R. seea' * Mir GOs SF NE No eh Om, pate Sih He: Ay.
a ae ae ei aah ai eee,
. {apy -
- . s 4, Pe
re
- 40 - yey
we eal
we cee ne A a Eo ee ee ne ee ee ee ne ee ee ee Se ee wae cee ee EAT wees ' one Ry in
quantify, but in my observation and judgment it is appreciable. | ae
It has some measure in the zeal with which landholders agitate : eae.
Wal 332 2¢¢
:o have -Federally developed and delivered waters made "appur- _ mPa
Ai eree
senant” to their lands.- | | era
. | eras:
(2) Marginal adjustments | oe
Ordinarily an appropriator with surplus water | oars
vould not want to sell his entire supply, but only the surplus, if Tee ag
chat is the part whose marginal productivity falls below its ao Neae ce
»pportunity cost. It is doubtful if a licensee could guarantee eared fi i a:
- We| (3c: ad
Hie | 3 3.3, Tay
che buyer a good title in such a transfer, however, because | ‘9 BS
an coed
he validity of the license rests on historical beneficial use, ‘| ex ot
nt; aoe
nd sale of surplus water could and doubtless would be siezed hl tee “
Rn ae ee
ipon by thirsty junior appropriators as evidence that the water tH i oH
ever had been used "beneficially" and should revert to them. PPX
. ~ LEP
ee a0 aa
7 the "Chicago School" approach of Drs. Hirshleifer, De Haven . I. oo,
and Milliman is doomed to frustration, I believe, for failure “apo
to acknowledge this aspect of the problem. They argue most th
persuasively the benefits to flow from removing barriers to an sea
transfer of water, their means being to strengthen absolute 7 PHONE -
private property control over water. (Water Supply [Chicago: | pe -
University of Chicago Press, 19607 pe: 23-34) But to con- an cers
vert a conditional into an absolute "Giveaway" is to clarify an See
the issue of distributive equity to the degree that the pub- a.
lic will become aware of it. So long as the licensees are af oan
ascendant they are unlikely to tolerate market transfers ‘| yO,
that risk arousing the public; while if the public were as-~ iS ee
cendant, it would not likely abandon all interest in its :
waters without exacting some quid pro quo. We are not likely 7
to achieve the benefits of market allocation of water rights 77 ee
without an unequivocal resolution of this incertitude: the ee
licensees gain full control of the water by buying or (I | woe
think preferably) leasing it from the State. ie Co
i oe
; ae
, | oe
| - 41 - oF;
“hus a lieénsee cannot sell something as good as what he has Mm} ed. ‘
>ecause the process of sale weakens the license. A strong bias 7 cane
against change inheres in the system. 7 f ee
(3) Rights held by water-users' organizations - ‘ ' ua
Additional difficulties beset transfers of water i oy
rights when these are held by Mutual Water Companies or Irriga~ | a
tion Districts. Since most water rights on the Kaweah and in ' oy
California are so held, these special hurdles are of prime I oP
importance in any discussion of water-right transfers. Curiously, ee
however, I have found little such discussion, so that what fol- | lore
lows must be partly the conjecture of a guardhouse lawyer, If eee
it is seriously misleading, I hope it will at least irritate i ee
some real lawver into publishing a definitive correction. 7 iO am
Mutual Water Companies and Irrigation Districts hold property " gee
and water rights as trustees for the beneficial owners, the ra
served landholders. The landholder is more than an ordinary : ote
shareholder in a Mutual, or a voter in a District: he is the ' | saeae
beneficiary of a trust. The law presumes that the trustees will : th G
continue the customary service to the customary beneficiaries 7 a
in the absence of some new condition which a judge finds com- | wns
pelling and persuasive. 7 oa :
Just what a judge might deem compelling and persuasive is iPe
sometimes hard for an economist to fathom, I have found no
clear-cut decision authorizing a Mutual or District to sell | 7 7
water rights. Nor have I found any instance where one has :
done so, save to another organization serving the same lands, | .
fia nnn wae, 4 I", tebe Set, Amira abe Ti RE ay 4 ‘ mor pe Cae ke
- 42 - | ae
‘oe
jut there are several tnetances of conveyances* through sale ~~ ae
\ | eo
ax foreclosure being enjoined, 48 Since there are scores of os
OSA
Jistricts and Mutuals with surplus appropriated water they 6G
. - ya VALS
3hould but do not sell, it seems that judicial interpretation i eeareic
. . | | oor
o£ the trustee relationship has virtually prohibited sale. | er
The would-be seller is pinched between the devil and the | Pe
cea
deep, for on one hand he must satisfy the courts that he is not | 8
depriving any litigious trust beneficiary of something of much ; | Bae:
IBS: 2s
value, and on the other hand that the District or Mutual has a It | eee
1. Brae
valid appropriation to convey, based on beneficial use. An Hi ae
2conomist might feel he could resolve such a dilemma to the H ae: >:
| tt
mutual benefit of all parties, but economic concepts are not to i ee
3e presumed as among the intellectual equipment of jurists, .. i fetom
on coh a
2specially in the lower courts. So the trustees play it safe a) a
a ore
»y hanging on to all the water they can for such future use as | oon
it may have to them, It is effectively withdrawn from commerce : oe
in a mortmain grip as deadly as that fastened on the lands of yrs
—_—_— a thee.
redieval Europe. TEE
PX *
Wes.
48 Copeland et al. v. Fairview Land and Water Co. et al., 165 anaes -
Cal. 89 (1913); Bent v. Second Extension Water Co. et al. 51 a
C.A. 648 (1921); Hutchins, Wells, Mutual Water Companies in 17
California and Utah, Farm Credit Administration, Cooperative >
Division, Bulletin No. 8 (Washington: Gov't. Printing Office,
1936), pp. 87-91, 137-38; Tulare Irrigation District v. qo
Collins, 154 Cal. 440 (1908). “An Irrigation District owns a.
no lands in a proprietary sense, and its property is owned .-
by the State and is held only for governmental purposes". oo
--Allen v. Hussey, 225 Pac. 2d 674, (1950); 101 C. A. 2d |
457 (1951). OO — | To
.
4 "
dhe i a cinta llc ad ' ay 5S
s 1" wet . :
, et)
- 43 - 7 »
| | eee
cent ce nee gn ee ee ane enn enna ene eng cee oe oe eee neenmeneenenn nee oe Sane ce cine een ne = te “id
(4) Point of diversion er $e
In transferring an appropriative right one may : pe
shift the point of diversion only if no one is damaged. The t 3stng
— t - ms
most economical transfers in the Kaweah area would entail H race
shifting points of diversion, as we have noted, But today one | nae
cannot shift any point of diversion without damaging or at ret.
| | ees,
least discommoding someone else. 4? One could seek an agreement t ee:
| | epeacas
from him not to press his claim, but his ransom is not neces- . ! ad ote
: TERE
sarily limited to actual damages. No point of diversion has ute
A ae
been changed on the Kaweah during the period this study covers i ee
| eg
most intensively, that is back to 1919; and the general patterns i ¥ aa
. ae paar
of uneconomic diversions still extant go back at least to 1880, i F ie
it ay)
when they were roundly condemned by the California State Engi- Me
neer 20 : <a
poo ;
. ee
L
49 PS.
On the neighboring Kings River a few changes have been pos- oe Pores
sible, but only downstream. --Clarence Smith, Kings River VBR LS -
Water Master, in interview, 1958. The General need, however, } ESS,
is for upstream shifts, and these are blocked by intervening TP pe
land holders with interests in channel seepage. [ Fp
30 Hall, Wm. H. Report of the State Engineer to the Legislature °
of California, bession of L880, Part I (i880), pp. BS. 35, fee
36, 105-17 et passim. Hall's observations applied specifi- ';
cally to the Kings, Tule, and Kern, which border on and | Moe
overlap the Kaweah service area. os
Ip
‘| ae:
i
4 aa
| 7" e
. mn Lahey
: Aa .
- } Siw Eg
. ° } pert
° 44 . : eeer,?
oe ee ce ee ee rn nee ee wa ee te em eee cee ener tiene cnet ee ce ameeeee nee enn eee cones - tt a4
IV. The dynamic evolution shaped by water law | Bae:
| Bee.
Professor Wantrup has remarked that a system of water law , al i
- - ; | ieee
should be judged over time, >+ and the point is well taken. t wos.
| | ane
sut if this is to imply that the judgment will thereupon become ; eae
: | es
yore favorable, it is not. , : wef
| eS
The effect of water law on economic development is to rein- : bes on
force other economic and political pressures working toward | slg
| | ae.
xremature over-development of new lands, a process already ; 4 par.
ayes ga e
vast the point of no return today, Let me expand on this per- 7 gto
. it | Bearer -
iaps startling asseveration. | Oper
a 2
a 7 ae os
A. Marginal. vs. monumental adjustments i 44
Legal pcvception of economic values is too crude, as we ‘ yay
EP ad, -
ave seen, to effect or even to permit of marginal adjustments See
mong local water-users. Yet Justice is not entirely blind. pe
' ~
‘t is more to be likened to the near-sighted Mr. Magoo who |
‘ oe
‘oes respond, however inappropriately, to the major outlines | _ .
£ things. After the water-seeker has ranged far enough from laos
oA
Px
ome, and crossed several underused streams, he ultimately | a
‘eaches one in which the courts will acknowledge the existence : aus
o£ a “surplus”. ac
1 Wantrup, S. V., "Conceptual Problems in Projecting the Demand a.
for Land and Water", Giannini Foundation Paper No. 176 Lt.
(Berkeley: 1959) mimeo., p. 14. | _
a ee re Terra od ahead ase
- Hee
: : 65. >
~~He finds the courts Tittle concerned with any monetary ! at
comparison of productivity F.0.B. the source. Such compari- t ee
sons might leave him with a negative or very low net product, aN
after deducting his high conveyance costs. But the law is - re
disposed to count that in his favor as a mark of sincere pur- ey
pose and acute thirst. ae
Panglossian philosophers may point to this as evidence that | ae
water law is, after all, dynamic, On the Kaweah, it is true ae
water law has attained to a nearly perfect degree of stagnation | tae
which the law contemplates with equanimity. But this has not | eon
Stopped, indeed it has materially accelerated great inter- | eee
regional transfers of dimensions that dwarf the Kaweah. ae
Thus water law as a whole does not simply resist change. | ie
Inexpensive little local economies on the Kaweah meet a stone . es
vall of judicial disapproval, but water law opens up wide es
avenues for monumental projects to effect grand interregional Wee,
cransfers.?'? Rather than block development, it biasses devel- fee .
o2pment toward remote sources. This is the dynamic growth pattern Hess
‘mposed by water law. If we wish to criticize the law, it | ‘oan 7
wust be on grounds that the type of change it promotes is less jPey -
lesirable than the alternatives. : Pres.
14 For a more general criticism of monumental transfer projects 7 __
see Hirshleifer et al., op. cit. (Note 47). DAY.
;
ce Ne
. er
"2 46 ’ ee
--—-§- Drawbaeks—of-monumental projects 9 cee
Monumental interregional transfer projects have captured rat
the imaginations of the State's voters and politicians to the. : 3 at
extent that they now dominate water development. It is my aid
thesis that this type of development is leading to overexpan-~ i &. Sy
sion, | ee ‘3
1. Size of increment : ares :
A remote import must usually be a large one for several | weg
reasons, First, to be economical at all it must realize scale | RH
economies springing from the fact that canal cross sections in- ie
crease out of proportion to their cost. Second, it requires S73
strong political support, to secure both water rights and State | ae
or Federal financing, and for these purposes it must have a_ . | aoe
large service areas: Third, this service area typically has Ps | ia
scattered irrigation developments, and to keep project distri- ye ,
bution costs within bounds it must plan to serve the included ee -
dry lands as well. Likewise, in recharging underground reset- 7 a
voirs, it must import enough to recharge the entire area over he
which irrigation is scattered. Fourth, the political conjunc- Hk
ture which permits the region to import water is an opportunity on
to be fully exploited, and the beneficiaries will try to stake ee -
claim to as much water as possible. oes
So a remote import is likely to be a large one, an indivisi- : a
bility in economic development, in contrast to the continual o
fine adjustments that would be possible under a more flexible oot
system of water law. In the Kaweah area the increment from . 7 .
!
y fal mre _- cb te He .. wee cath “ity TP Pee Sy: a Pe VM G a BA! wy One: Ot ~ So) (Misaite,
a x4 ~
De Sas
| | - 47 - ar
oe eee anne oe ee ae
the Central Valley Project is in fact several times the local fo: 1
eae
supply, The Friant-Kern Canal with 4,000 second-feet capacity ‘| Bee
can import most of the San Joaquin River, whose mean annual wg
flow of nearly two million acre-feet is about four times the ae
combined means of the Kaweah and Tule Rivers. More, this is : vy
xegulated water from Millerton Lake. Almost one million acre- ish be,
° | ee
feet is to be Class I water delivered on demand. The increment : Eee: -
to summer water is much greater than 400%, F ae’
4 gay
The potential impact of this increment has been concealed, { Bas "
iB fF
among other ways, by the belief that much of it would go to t ees -
| eRe
overcome overdraft, But the annual overdraft is of a much oe
smaller order than the San Joaquin imports, Equally important, 7 ea
2 } a
there is no basis for assuming that irrigated land development : pes
will cease when water equilibrium shall have been attained. , ae
There are no controls on pumping and nothing (except market | a
i ~ ro
collapse) to stop development short of another overdraft. But 1 So
in fact, before this becomes an issue there will be a question ae
ys
of how to dispose of the waters now used for recharge and soon iP -
to be available for other uses as that operation is completed, > PS.
52 In their commendable zeal to maintain the Government's bar- | are
gaining position in drawing up water contracts, Bureau of || a
Reclamation officials have understandably tended to minimize ae
this eventuality. See, for example, Hearings on S. 912... .,
supra (Note 14), pp. 710 et passim, Whether their prognosti- '
cations of continued high demand are correct is a question 7.
of fact which I am content to leave to the verdict of events. }
The current drought forestalls the emergence of a surplus, i oe
but on the other hand helps stimulate more new water supply if
developments that in the long run may aggravate the over- [Fe
supply. | on
!
{
“4
- paar ae — ’ se ’ ye 2) a a ey ae o * 7 . yee aac a,
* f r “whe
; | PSE,
|| eee es
~ 48 - ‘| ee
i ens
~~ In terms of acreage, size of the increment has been concealed —_—— | BRINE.
by most of its having gone into alfalfa, pasture, and cotton, | ee
whereby the impact is absorbed by nationwide markets or govern- \ Mise
i aS
ment storage. But these uses could never justify the cost of hls
the Central Valley Project. They are lower uses in an area of i ceyt
. : i oe Tee -
excellent soils and superlative climate suited for horticulture \ as pied
| aera
and winter vegetables, It is only a question of time before Coes”
Mm) AD
these slower-developing, higher-yielding farm enterprises lay : rouk.:
“Ti ©, som
claim to much of the new water. | AS 3a
aot y<
. Peete
But here the impact will be overwhelming. Three local pro- * eS.
: ie 2%, ze ;
ducts of which California produces most of the nations’ supply if
are plums, freestone peaches, and navel oranges. These supplies foe
come from the following acreages: plums, 21,000; freestones, mie Se
| aaa
36,000; navels, 65,000.72 In the last five years, new non- : “ae
bearing acres of these (and other) tree fruits have turned up a
sharply, reversing long declines. The potential acreage incre- RY -
ments of 10% or 20% have aroused considerable anxiety, as well Wer
they might, the moreso because they are more intensively planted | aoa
than the old and with better stock, But they are as nothing Wa
compared to the eligible acres now newly supplied with water dee an
from Friant-Kern. The increment of almost one million acre-feet aoe
: FA
53 Dean, Gerald W., and McCorkle, Chester 0., Trends for Major
California Fruit Crops, California A.E,S. Extension Service a
Circular 448, 1960. : io
Sherwood W. Shear of the Giannini Foundation has been more a | 7
than gracious in supplying acreage and production data, oy
Neither of the above is implicated in the use of the data here. :
i hh eee
| | Rees
- 49 - | is Bs
ger year of Class I water, and additional Class II of variable oo ; ON ~
water, could support 300,000 or 400,000 new acres, far more | ; seg
than markets could absorb in the foreseeable future. This one t on
project has brought water supply to so much potential fruit - Ae
land that fruit land as such is hardly any longer a scarce Beery
economic good. Scarcity today attaches only to producing groves, ee
and tomorrow perhaps not even to them. Only this relationship | pie
is not yet reflected in land prices, whose inflated levels | ed
lend a specious plausibility to the Project still. ! AA
2. Slow response to changing demands on ay
Another serious drawback of remote imports is the long ! oie
lag between stimulus and response, Lindsay-Strathmore's wells | ar
began striking boron in 1913, Friant-Kern water reached them ‘| ee
in 1951, 38 years later. Meantime the area's high potential ae .
citrus development was arrested completely, and other regions mo
filled the gap. The scale economies of monumental projects a ~
are to be considerable discounted on account of their ponderous Hh .
immaneuverability. They are slow a-building, and once built ‘oo .
they are slower to liquidate. They cannot be rolled up when pee ;
obsolete, and they pay out slowly if at all. ples :
3. A cycle of over development ona
A response which is both slow and excessive is the basic Frat
element in a cycle of over development along the lines of the
classic cobweb theorem (corn-hog cycle). Only with land and . =
water development the period is much longer, the mistakes irre- . of
versible, and the excesses much greater for several reasons I : -
will mention, a ;
; . a Ee
LOM
- 50 - im Loy
ry
a. Lag of private land improvement behind public works ~~ °—----- ly .)
. ¢ ve ey 7
To increase public water supplies rarely results in Say
ommensurate increases in the products of irrigated land until ! Ne eat
ong after, because private improvement of the lands made irri- / | pa
‘able lags many years, decades in fact, behind the public works .>4 : oad
‘hus, the price effects and capital requirements of the incre- ~ (ey . Be
. on - ry ’
yental land supply are deferred and concealed until the project ae
ind its several features are committed past the point of no | | aan
‘eturn. The long developmental period of tree fruits lends it- r ued
: mh. ade nN
self to its own cycle of overexpansion anyway. When this is . cB SS
:ombined with the lag in building large water supply systems f pee
she lags and accompanying perils of overexpansion are multiplied. rhe
b. Incitement of other projects _ ge S
ot s Em ore,
a os ieee
(1) The price umbrella hae
Lagging private development of project-served eee
tands holds a price umbrella that entices more starts than mar- 4 Se" >
cets can ultimately absorb and for which capital can be found fee
it feasible cost. The high prices bring on competitive starts ~ pee
o£ several kinds, Private lands in older irrigated areas are Pes.
a ee
intensified, for which the sloppy developments of the past ( was
Hee >
ann PER
4 Teele, Ray P., The Economics of Land Reclamation, (Chicago: | See
A. W. Shaw Co., 1927), pp. 99-100. ae
_ » Land Reclamation Policies in the United States, ‘ 263
U. S. Dept. of Agri. Bulletin No. 1257 (Washington: Govern-
ment Printing Office, 1924), p. 15. i re
Huffman, Roy, Irrigation Develo ment & Public Water Polic > a a
(New York: The Ronald Press, 1953), pp. 61-62, 81. | ~
as | soy
_ | \ pee
- 51 - | eer
i ees
| as
~Yeave considerable scopé--in fact, if lands served by pre- = | Tee, _
Central Valley Project water supplies were developed to capacity, ! ee)
there would be little need for new public water supplies. Lands _ : 2
in the new project area are planted at high standards of inten- us:
sity based on high land values that do not accurately reflect : pac:
the impending abundance of raw land. . inte
Most striking of all, entirely new water supply projects are | aa
begun. To a degree this is simply analagous to what has happened | er ‘.
in land cycles of every kind throughout our history. But water : foe
law is responsible for amplifying the cycle in ways besides ase
those already mentioned. ee
(2) Racing for water rights ee
When one region goes foraging about the whole [pes .
State for "surplus" waters, this naturally awakens anxieties Ae, -.
in others lest they lose out. They seek to nail down claims peo
that others cannot jump. The surest means to this end is to er =
begin developing waters to establish a history of use. It hee :
takes little imagination to anticipate the result, which today Woo ;
one observes throughout California: premature interest in ; ee
developing water ahead of need. (eee ;
(3) Logrolling os, -
| or
Monumental interregional transfers are usually 7 cee
too costly for local finances, They are undertaken with State t .
and Federal subsidies. This incurs political debts to be repaid Sr -
in kind, less on a basis of economic productivity than of polit- . ye _
ical bargaining power. There must be something for everyone, = oo
. a.

" = 52 - te WS

aioe

or at least for enough legislators to constitute’a working at .

majority. And most projects need to be started before any is wry

completed, lest late starters lose their bargaining-power. ase

This process clearly lends itself to the cycle of overexpan- . ene

sion, too: the impact of the first project is suppressed by es

non-completion until the later ones are well underway. This ast:

is the sort of process by which Indiana went bankrupt in another ee

kind of canal boom that busted in 1836. . nai
org

Cc. Current overexpansion of water-supply projects Pa a

J. K. Galbraith has won wide support for his thesis that tees

we put too smalla portion of our resources into the public ae
sector. While this may be true in comparing tail fins vs. |e
school rooms, it can be very misleading in comparing private |
vs. public coniributions to land and water development. Public | on
water supply works stand ready to serve far more land than pri- . a
vate capital has improved to use the water. - -
This is not a new phenomenon. David Weeks & Charles West is
documented it extensively in 1927 in their classic The Problem Fes
of Securing Closer Relationship Between Agricultural Develop- ie ~

ment and Irrigation Construction, ”> They noted that capital ion _

flowed into public water supply works much easier than into i on
35 Univ. of Calif. College of Agriculture, Agri. Expt. Sta., ;
1270 435 (Berkeley: Univ. of Calif, Printing Office, a
_ ; per
- 53 - fee ee
corresponding private farm ‘improvement , with a resulting lag, Hess
serious imbalance, and ultimate overdevelopment of irrigated ee
land. Their judgment was abundantly confirmed in the ensuing PR
collapse of land values. - coe
The premature excessive public works they observed were ain
the product of local enterprise almost entirely, To redress as
the balance would seem to have called for diversion of capital - rae A
from public works to individual land improvement. Yet instead ae
the last 25 years have witnessed the opposite, and on a scale Ae
hitherto undreamed of, Sais
First, the value of the tax-exempt feature of local bonds Ce.
has risen along with p rsonal income tax rates. In the 1920's ee
these bonds often sold at big discounts: today at handsome Rear
premia. H ee .
‘Second, local water enterprises receive new State and Federal ie
subsidies, under the Small Projects Act, the Davis-Grunsky | oa
Act, and interest-free loans from the ‘Bureau of Reclamation. —_
Third, Irrigation Districts and private power companies ae
have cemented an effective working alliance whereby the power prog ~
company borrows the Irrigation Districts’ immunity from local Pest _
property taxes and pays for it with free water. This is a big [ve
factor in the estimated one billion dollars worth of local pro- : ” a
jects now under way in California. °° t-
aa
56 Western Water News, October, 1960 ws _
ba oe ‘ eae wag
| : es,
- 34 - BS
nes 2 ¢ -.- _-
Fourth, the Army Engineers have gotten into water supply | A
under guise of flood control, especially since the Flood Con- 24
trol Act of 1944, and are planting Federal projects in hitherto Sar
neglected sites all over the State, including Terminus on the A
Kaweah, and Success and Pine Flat on its neighbors the Tule ae
and Kings. . iar é
Fifth, the Bureau of Reclamation, once a negligible force ON
in California, has contributed the Central Valley Project and ee
its slowly proliferating appendages. S98
Sixth, if all this were not enough, we add now the Feather oe
River Project, whose $1.75 billion bond issue is conceived as Sea
only a beginning on an overall California Water Plan, pecs
Finally, seventh, Secretary of Interior Udall announces that Kew?
the U.S. has shirked its duties and will increase its contri- line
butions to water supply development. ; ols
There has been no commensurate stimulus to the flow of cap- , .
ital into improving private farm lands, On the contrary, higher i
personal income tax rates, in conjunction with the various po
capital gains loopholes, have encouraged much more land buying Fa
to reap price increments without land improvement, a type of i wt -
behavior that has previously played a central role in creating Hoe
this problem even without such added stimulus. Indeed it is v
only in the last five years or so that bearing acreages of {
most of California's distinctive specialty crops have ceased } ity
a iene - . mes : late : pid ti att ' , Pitas ‘
sontracting.°” Were 1s the bottleneck that has held back =sts—=~*~S*wa~iS
output and sustained the prices on which the whole mammoth ee
structure of public works is premised. Modest increases of a _ PEs "
few thousand bearing acres, soon finally to be forthcoming, TRA
are adequate to meet the market demands that ultimately must oa
justify investments in water supply. z pa
Irrigation is new enough in American history that it has oe
figured in only two major land collapses, 1893 and 1929. But ey -
in those two it figured prominently, through excessive expan- i ee
sion of water supply works for undeveloped lands. "Too much, has
too late" has characterized the denouement of each cycle. se
There is evidence. that we have moved too far on the same course ies
again. ; : S. °
In this cycle water law, while not solely responsible, ee .
plays an important role. It is water law that blocks the eco- oo
nomical use of the best waters, compelling recourse to marginal oe
sources, gigantic projects, and State and Federal financing I -
with consequent log rolling. It is water law that sets region ee
racing against region, and agency against agency to establish P. .
use rights ahead of need. I .° -
And so when we view water law in the dynamics of development Rose
the view is more illuminating, but not more complimentary. How 4
serious the defects, again I am willing to leave to the verdict
of events. . 2
~ 97 Dean and McCorkle, op. cit. (Note 53). oo ,
os . at of
- 56 - eee
See emma rane SoS a pa nae ara ean gees mn oe eR en ee te oe nee cae eee een pe ge nee nyo cet pee 1.
V. Conclusion Ley
gat} ,
, enh eg
In this paper I have sought to expound the conclusion 1 Pe
2G
have reached from observation of water use in thé Kaweah area, ee
- ae a R
that water use is grossly uneconomical. 1 have laid the blame ~- Peas
aaa
where I believe it belongs, on the doorstep of water law. I Bg
oa NN
"The a.
have gone on to show how water law contributes to the cycle of ied
overexpansion which has rum so far along today. Sr5%
eet
Nar,
I have not suggested, save by indirection, alternative 5A
saree C.
policies, nor will I impose further on your patience by doing . ET “
; Pats f-
so now. But assuredly, if it be established that present pol- pees
icies are intolerable, the moulding of new is the greatest a
c allenge facing our profession. Az 7
i
.
a) | oo :
. | ~ |
. | . !
| fo
| ’
rT :
smn ae al" | |
cama shia del tpn ahaa Lanes inal haianel : poy ORE NY ee fa } ;
: t a ee ates pom
preeteeeeeeeee smsrnmcrese “ a — ; tat .
sroonat : Lace vated *. 60.1 : :
: Cen, : cocosossescoders 2 ft “ y ! ,
gene ; Lececnsens coereceeeresessonsges caer Ry A, ; :
: J , wYreny 4 « Wee) 7 :
gre ™ t , - : : .
5 i wpa sles oe {Z
-. ry BY Ff fz ) |
Ey 0 iy ct - 2 Ly i
i £23 fewen S ea ~ as +i :
i [Vf - By .
| . if oT... |
i Tes : ; - HT BES aay “HS :
onl my a Yate |
: wt eet poe yy NS . i ‘
“ ros ne 5D eee
i ae Be yi ~ Pst Ota
an wy bla Te
a poate, OMX 0 Kye LEO \. : |
meg ta SY ra ; | ahd Boe. 7 i i 7
ee! . a. fo , mf EL eta, dh os : h l¢
ge . Bt hy el Re Ma? Pe. He ovrucs Ze ! i
Byte ses way we MOURNE 7% pe NEO PLES Ye
| oe a a ; id kt | geeeed Ae iy
Bape hee _ f tani so Ald > f’ . 8 ag % _
: a ° 5 xt : . H AEN |e |
Frrerergte” ye nay. ~ ; — _ , =a ! f & OH..62 oe LG, aE -_
: és ee a . = nas et 3 Beet OA FE sareree
: y * wie wd fr meds 3 hair SSN 138 Pe, i iat Si ae
bd yi 'é q . y Sth 6 %, Ses rags fags 28 ~ a
a Y oe wae 4.8 OU ft CAM PANY Lg BC Bieeg ed re ad
2 4 : Os Tae ric af” 3 ZEX Lipp Sg Be eoqan mote
pret a Pe ‘ y Bet H Ei rage ee fees mee
eerooees 2 no ho . Fe ceucel CL
; 7 ee) | Vesabe. | eT, 5 a i “Yj” Poon ,
Seow eveee kg ry be nae corse’ is beedebesrssesoee® Tn SS ee
3 ie soissinas tt “a By ou prerererevere’® Piebereere meet ZZ LIE, GARR LANDS wiTH |inmvcation stavice
5.8, BR jrrscenccoeoooes wa get 7 maak” jpnee
$ “og 5 H . . Kawean AiveR
: i i 3 i rs . SHOWING Five! OF THE TWENTY-<<oE
sesecerereg I » i SEAVICE AAAS
Secome’ i pe / 40
3 STIS a ee Peete ome POTRO,...6 Pile inthe
y . 2 . *
a 1 . i
