                                      Nons                                    427
•      WATER LAW AND ECONOMIC TRANSFERS OF WATER:
                        A REPLY
                              M. lsU.SON CAEFNEY
                              University of Al issouri


T      HIS is a reply to Dean Frank Trelease's comment' on a case study
       of western water law as applied to the ICaweali River, California.'
  That case study finds diseconomies in water allocation, and lays much
of the blame to water law. Dean Trelease Ends this ye'y disturbing7
which reaction I. in turn, find a Utile puzzling, since he is himself no
mean gadfly on the subject. Probably the answer is that there is a real
issue between us: he leaning to the view that the appropriative doe-
time is essentially sound, needing some repairs about the fringes; I to the
idew that many &economies are inherent in the core concept of prior
appropriation. Such issues are hard to join cleanly, bowever and all subtle-
ties hard to pinpoint, among the Dean'& conjectures and divagations.
One must admire the errantry with which he charges onto unfamiliar
ground, but I find myself hard to recognize in some of the dragons he
smites there, a crew of such mixed ancestTy that I believe the greatest con-
tribution I might make to this discussion would be to line them up for in-
dividual ins-pecon.
   The Dean's thesis, as I read it, proceeds as follows:
    L Gafey blames appropriative law for initiating and peipetuating
       the misallocation of water oil the ICaweab;
    2. But California law is quite clear that water rigbts are transferable
    3. The real bathers to transfer in this case are probably:
       a. present uses yield spillover benefits not accounted for by Caff-
         DC)',
      b. present licensees are irrationally attached to their water rights
         and do not accept a legal and economic opportunity to sell; -
    4. The law represents the value judgments of the people.

Let me comment on those points in order.
i. On the reZatwe meritsof appropnacive law
    As a champion of appropriative law, Dean Trelease bas reacted seiec-
lively to different passages in my ICaweah study. The study allots blame
     TreLease, Fraok, 'Water Law and Economic Transfen of Water,"
                                                           -      43 WE (5):
1147-52 (FrocecdMgs Issue, Dec., 1961).
   Cdney, Mason, tiseconoinies Inherent in Western Water Laws: a California
Case Study," Economic Analysis of Multiple tin, Report No. 9 in the series SVcter
end Range Resotzrces and Eco'.omic Development of the West Paceeedings, Western
Agncultuni Economics Resench Council, Range and Water Section. Tucson, AS.,
Januaty 23-24, l96Lpp. 55-89.
428                                     Nmts
impartially among the riparian. appropriative, and correlative doctjine
save to note that the Icaweah Delta has "more than the usual quota of
riparian lands? In California's system of scrarnb!ed water law it is baxdJç
possible to know just which doctrine is blocking what worthwhile pro.
ect. If J had to choose I would share die Dean's partiality for the appro.
priative over the riparian system, just as I would rather he shot than
hanged. Btit I would prefer a wider choice.
  The Dean overstates my case a hit when he tells us that Caffneji teEs
us that transferable appropriative claims could not operate in a fashion
to maximize benefits from water use. What Calfney fries to tell us is
that in California appropriative liàenses are so hedged about with corn!i.
dons and complexities as to he non-transferable in practice. Dean Tie-
lease speaks of what they might he; I of what they are. I do not qua..
don that society could create definite and alienable claims on nter. I
wish itwould.
   But the Dean is correct if he intuits that I believe such negotiable in-
strwnents would little re3ernhle what today we call a license to
priate water. The present system is less one of licensing than of licçnse It
encourages landholders to range as far as they can to claim more nta
than they use, and use more water than they need, sooner than they need
it. I doubt that it can simply evolve into an economical system. The necn-
sajy changes would eliminate most of what is chaiactexisticafly 'appm-
pdative.' Dean Trelcase offers no comment on the sever! points I raise
inth!sveirz.'
  khe Dean has confused issuesfurther by shifting between tle hanS-
ferability of appropriative licenses and that of shares in mutual wata
companies. From his second paragraph one would gather be was con.
cerned about the fonner issue, but his later cliscuthion nc&ns the ktteç
a related yet disH act matter which my Kaweab study treats separately.
   Now it may be well established in some jurisdictions, as Dean Trelease
alleges, that an appropriator can only sell what be has been using -
sumptively, but there is no such general limitation on transferring wata
company shares in the southern San Joaquin Va]lcy. Some sbares bait
been restricted by the companies themselves thin Lied perimetell
but others have rambled over the lea and far away, wagging their exteP
natities behind them. There has been wailing and gnashing of teeth, but
lamentation has not enjoined the transfers.
  'What really has blocked many other and more desirable fr2I1SkT.
however, is the law, which interdicts a change in point of diversion. JE
Consolidated Peopids Ditch Company v. Foothill Ditch Corn pan tiw
court did not enjoin the transfer of 'water as such. Lindsay-StratIUflOfl
  'Op. cit, pp• 64; 6g-70: 72-74; 78.
   205 C3alifornia 54 269 Pac. 915 (1928), at 64, 65, et pauim.
                                              Noirs                           429

        could take the water corresponding to the shares it had bought, said
        the court, provided it did not do so in the direct and economical way, hut
    -
        a the water fall 200 feet and more to the diversion points that were good
        ajough for Crandpa, and pumped it back uphill.
          Dean Trelease is again intuiting aright when be wonders if the cross-
        h2uling I deplore was not largely necessitated to avoid changing points
        of diversion. But whether that in turn reflects any overriding legal solid—
        tude Eor spillover benefits is doubtful. The law has permitted all man-
        er cE changes in place oE use, provided only all ditches stem from the
        fixed ancient diversion points. Thus water has to reach its destinations
        iii the same roundabout manner that the jaw has to reach some of its con-
        dusions. Points of diversion are treated as precedents.
        . California law on the transferability of appropriot ice rights
     }1ov, asks the Dean, can law which specifically states that changes
  un he made operate to block changesr That Is an odd question for a
        to raise; when evely reasonably skeptical layman observes that
- the pious protestations of one law are often subverted by others. Need

        cue mention more than the 15th Amendment?
         I will not repeat here the relevant passages of my Xaweih study. They
        are available to whosoever wishes to consult that work3 But I would
        Ste the occasion to add one more point, which overlaps some of the others
          well.
•    C2!in!a law zd pr2cUce have !o2gIet municipaiilies (a term which
   2ekd-ts inigaon &st-ics} reserve future- waters,- exempt from- the                 ---_   —


   general requirement of due diligence; in anticipation of ailcged greater
• teds. Many of these needs have never materialized, and probably never
•  sill-witness San Francisco3 and the Modesto, Turloelç and Merced itt!-
          Districts, among others. But the Jaw does not proyide for their
   selling their claims on surplus reserved waters. To sell something you
        must owu it, and to own a perfected appropriative claim on water you must
        !ave put water to beneficial use. Mçantime, which may literally be a cen-
        hit or more, the claimant can hardly convey that which is his only upon a-
        cocdition he has not met.' He can, however, and does prevent anyone
        ekes using it.
          Obviously the waters most eligible for sale are those that are surplus
        to their claimants, yet they are the ones most hlcely to be trapped in this
        Iej limbo. The resen'er can release them only by abandonment and
        frneiture, which nets him nothing but a sense of philanthropy toward
        thaI municipalities
           Gaffoev1 Op. cii, pp. 70-74 et paSm.
          'Cf. H6bktfer, Jack, Dehaven, James and Milliman, Jerome, Waler Supply
        •Cricazo: Univ. of Cbicago Press, 1960) p. 240, n. 50.
 430                                Nons
   In practice many appropriators other than municipalities have also
 been allowed more water than they can use. Let me cite Dean Trelease
 to this point: Early irrigation decrees were often for atrociously large
quantities of water, and many of these are stili in effect." The Dean
also advises us, I think correctly, that forfeiture is almost impossible of
enforcemen      So long as these overendowed appropriators lie low and
keep still they are unlikely to be bothered. Let them by to sell theft sur
plus, however, and the paternal, public feels cheated. The appropriator
was given the resource to husband and use, not to sell podigally for
money as Pinocchio sold his school books. The chance that the reserver
could convey title that would hold against the swarm of claimants who
would then claim priority is dim.
2a. Spillover effects and the transferability of appropriative rights
  Dean Trelease's major point seems to be that the economics of sj11-
over effects are what block transfers of appropriative rights and water
company shares in the ICaweah area. He is content to wonder" rather
than commit himself, but if he has a thesis surely it is that
  First, a bit of local hydrology. Spiliover effects in the Kaweah area do nat
consist largely of the return flows the Dean posits. As my study indicates,
wound water gradieats slope away from the main channels. The spillovers
that help other irrigators (and have created severe drainage probies
in some areas) are: (a) deep percolation wider irrigated £elds; (b) am-
veyance losses which seep underground; and (c) channel seepage abcve
the diversion point Of these, the law appears to prätect only (c) channel        a
seepage, probably on the uneconomic principle that it is more naturar
The law does not protect upstream juniors against increases in channel
seepage which result from heavy pumping of wells. The upstream junior
must then let more water pass his wSr to maintain required fiot', for
downstream seniors.
  Second, there are spillover gains as well as losses. The Dean accentuates
the losses but overlooks any gains, a failing all too common in lils pro-
fession (and mine), and calculated to block all but extraordinarily ad-
vantageous transfers. He has no comment for my allegation that in the
instant case spillover benefits would exbeed spillover losses, becawe
of greater reuse of water when applied at higher elevations. And it not
generally to be expected that spillover benefits in areas of shortage would
exceed those in areas of surplus? Over-irrigation in the lowe Xaveah has
in fact created serious drainage problems.
   TTrekzse. Frank, A Model State Water Code for Blva Basin DcvelopmesC
22 Law end Conkmporanj Frobkrns 301 (1957). p.205.
    Trekase, Frank, 'Trends hi the Law of Prior Appropfla6on Proceeding; WCttt
Law Conferences, Uuiv. of Texas, (1954), p. 215.
                                      Nom                                       431
  Third, there has been no transfer of an appropriative right in the Ka-    -

weali system for decades. The fact speaks volumes.
 Fourth, appropriative law does not provide that injured parties shall
be compedsated when diversion points are moved; rather, it provides
that parties shall not be injured.' The injured party has not just a dam-
age claim, but a veto worth what the traffic will bear. This puts the wat&-
buyer in the position of a right-of-way agent unarmed with eminent do-
main. Dean Trelease has elsewhere remarked this weakness in the Hpar-
ian law: '. . the value of the water right may be the price of buying the
riparian's forebennce to enjoin the use, a price which may well be
what it is worth to the non-riparian to continue his development.'0.. . the
certainty desired by the prospective water user can rarely be obtained
from a single seller7ht Do these words not apply as well to the power-
of appropriators (and others with vested interest in channel seepage) to
enjoin moving points of diversion?
  Fifth. Dean Trelease wonders if the JCaweah litigants had vompetent
legal advice. Legal competency is a hard quality to define, but it is an
objective fact that the litigants in Tulare Irrigation District v. Lindtog-
Strathrnore Irrigation Dktrict spent between one and two million dol-
tars on legal counseL Lindsay-Strathmore akne had already spent
.5671,611 hy 1927' and the case dragged on to 1935. The Supreme Court
decision of that ye&3 left the major issues unresolved and the case
might still be at bar had not the litigants gone baitupt. A large share
th the debts tcexe incuired to pay counsel; about as ninth money was,
speut on iigfcz as on coasthiction. If those sacriEces were not enougb..
to buy competent legal advice one may fairly ask to how many citizens
that commodity is available?
  Finally, a word about the general problem of handling spilloyer effects.
It would be hard to find a public or private decision or ttansaction
wfthout effects on others than the prsneipal parties. In fidds other than
water, the law wisely refrains from requiring the active parties to come
to terms with all the discommoded passive ones, ebe transactions would
cease and society would stagnate. A commodity is not merchantable Il
bot cut clean from the cloying entourage of indirect interests.
  It would still be desirable to devise means to compensate losers front
the gains of winners. It is monsb-ously impractical to do so in each in-
  • CaUforWa Water Code Cb. to, Pan. 1706.
     A Mode! State \%'aler Co8C p.O7.
  "Ibid., p. 309.
   Adauis, Frank, irrigation Dtsfticts M CoJi/ornia, State of Californi3, Depaztment
( Public Works, Division of Ecgtheerfng and Inigatfon, Bultetha No. 21 (Sscra-
Cflto: State Pricting Office, 1929). p. 249.
    TvL2re irrigation District v. Lindwy-Strathtnore Irrigation Distrid, 3 Calif. (2)
439,45 Pac. (2d) 972 (19.35).
432                                  Nons
dividual transaction. A workable alternative lies in the tax mechanism.
Many indirect gains and losses accrue to individuals in their capacity
as landholders. Let the fisc therefore rely heavily on ad valorcin hind
taxes, keep assessments punctiliously current, and the winners automats
cally compensate the losers Progress in this direction would seem to hold
forth greater promise than litigating ad infinitum the external costs and
gains of every transaction.
3b. On she heirloom attitude toward water rights
   Dnn Trelease opines that 'reluctance to sell water rigbts Ic not a
legal factor? Caffney relates it indirectly to law but the reasoning is sub-
liminaI." That may depend in part on the reader's threshold of percep-
tion to the thinking of another disciplina It is common cause for tears and
laughter among economists that the public will acquiesce happily in the
most outrageous giveways of public property and valuable monopolies
to sell liquor, broadcast on Chanud ; or drive tans; until one beneficiary
s fcund seUiug his privilege fcr money—then it becomes immoral profit.
wing.'4 Is it implausible then to suggest that a privileged class tends
to develop modes of beha lot and apression calculated to n""e this
fisk? Is it subliminal to relate that to the precazious legal instrumeft via
which public property is given away?
  Tell me not that the risk is past that society may reassert its col-
lective ownership Were that so, it would not be necessaxy for every other
issue of Western Water News to headline 'Water Rights in Jeopazdy.
nor for so many writers on water to volunteer disclaimers of belief in
taking without compensation. The ladies do protest too much, methinks.
These phenomena in fact befray the deep anxiety felt by licensees over
the status of their privileges.
  For tit anxiety and uncertainty the law must bear its full measure
of respousibility Rather t1'an resolving doubts by clearcut Ieader
ship, it stands poised, like Talleyrand, prepared to dodge the tumbrels
of either party. Rather than designate water as public' or private the
law makes it both, or either. Dean Trdease's statement is cliaracteristia
     the appropriator, with the penthssion of he State, receives a prfvi!ege (1
using the property of the State a privilege that may be no Iessprcperty but
certahly property of a con&tiona) and permissive kind. The State through a
system of administrative macbinexy sees to ft that its property is used wheb
and weU.
  - Dean Tideast has commented elsewhere on the punitive public rcactioc to web
traSeking. Re attibutes the rcstzictive legislation of some states to the desire t
prevent abuses that arose from the tnnsfer of some oH water xigk&—t& Model
State Water Coder p.315.
    Trelease, Frank Treads in the Law of Prior AppmpctatioxC Procee&np.
Wacet Law Conferences, Univ. of Texas (1954), p.220.
                                    Noms
  Perhaps no'r it is my perception that is dull, but to me that verges on
doubletalk. If the state is the owner, then the licensees, in the bold Mo-
saic phrase, are sojourners and sangers with usa" and it only breeds
confusion to tell them their licenses are no less propertf and indulge
their conceit that they have more than precarious tcnancies.
  If the state is to remain the owner oE water, let it do so in the clean
and unambiguous way enunciated by Oregon Chief Justice McBride:
     it does not seem to me that it [water use] ever arose in this country
above the dignity o( a mere privilege, over which the legislature had com-
plete control7" Or, if we prefer to pass title to appropHator, let them
p;v a market price and get a real titi; fully alienable and fully taxable
3S private property. The present precarious status only guarantees
continued conflict, confusions and litigation.
  Ucenses to appropriate water have distinctive qualities other than pre-
csriousness, and I would not impute the heirloom quality exclusively to
that. One may End the above reasoning subliminal and still observe that
the heirloom attit'zde attaches not to water as such but to water Tights, the
legal instrument the law has forged for claiming the use of water.
Put water in a bottle or metered pipe, and people buy and sell it with a
good deal less sentiment than they attach to their houses or goli club
memberships. But once create a legal obstacle course which obstruéts
bansfers, and you begin to endow water rights with the essential heir..
kcm pia1ity which is irreplaceability. Thenceforward the process is en-
r±ve: becazse wnter is bird th replace people cling to surplus water,
trh!th makes water htder to replace, and so on.
 To find attitudes resembling the heirloom attitude toward ajnopxia-
five licenses one need rather look to simil r legal instxuments. The obvious
parallel is with land titles, especially in areas and ages where these are
closely held, lightly taxed and encumbered with barriers to transft Water
rights are on their way to becoming the panlyzing znortmain of the modern
'vest
L On the lawyer? responsibility foi the law
 There was no need for Dean Trelease to defend his profession for It
ns not under attack except as the shoe might fit. Particular lafl yes,
but not law. But so long as he raises the subject I do not believe that the
legal profession, which has a unique authority over law, can ask absolu..
Son from a unique responsibility for it.
  It is frue that lawyers have no monopoly on either power or folly, and
the will of the majority is often illadvised. But this 'will of the majority

 "Levftfcus 25:2&
  1n ye Hood River, 114 Oregon 112, 221 Pac. 1065 (1924) at 190-91.
434                                NotEs

is a shapeless humor that filters through several layers of lawyers below
czystallizing into effective law., Legislators are mostly lawyers; they use
legal counsel to draft bills before they pass, and Attorneys Ceneni to
explain them afterwards. They have a weakness for leaving key dcci.
sions for their colleagues on the bench, and much of water law is pur&
judge-mada
   It is fitting that we should evdow'a lawgiving caste with some speciJ
powers. Without leadership the people" is a headless monster. It is abO
fitting that lawgivers harkeii to the will of the public, but what pubIic
The Dean's quite a few irrigators" are a minute and biassed interg
group. One of the best reasons for giving lawyers so much discretion is the
pioteclion they can afford us against the clamor of pñvilege groups that
so often sways legislatures. Wben lawyers think they hear tEe will of
the majority in these strident and demanding voices they axe on the verge
of forfeiting one of the important functions that warrants their preroga.
                          -
lives.                                         -

  To nimmarize my differences with Dean Trelease and those to whom
he lends support their economizing instincts are good, but they are too
easily satisfied. If a dnblet trickles in an economical direction through
the baffles of water law, thath enough to sbow forth the law's goodness.
If responses lag for decades behind the stimuli of demand, the impctt
thing is that movement is in the right direction.
   I maintain on the other hand the system is not good enough. At Em
blush that seems to be a digerence of degree only, but it evolves into a
difference of kind. Had we but world enougi and thne;ve might pa-
tiently finance generations of legal talent acingdown formulae tarecon-
cUe economics and law. But wben the law fruslntes an optimal adjustment
of resources to meet demands, times winged c}&iot drawing near 31
S or 10 percent per annum spurs us on to ent rtain less attractive alter-
nativ€s. Economic pressures build up until one of these poorer choices is
taken, irreversibly, at great cost, to the permanent preclusion of the optimal
adjustment These poorer choices are often ponderous ntenegonal bans-
fers, so slow in gestation and so overwhelming in volume as to pose serious
problems of developmental instability. But on that, the upshot of my thesis,
Dean Trelease offers no comment.
  I agree with Dean Trelease that Americans bavebumbled many things.
and America is great, but I question if the one caused the other. Itis oct.
bumbles and fumbles, but recoveries that make a nation great The uu
bumbling of our water law is not likely if the goodenough-for-CrandP3
school prevails.
                                    NotEs                                   433
                                                                                       -a
    \VATER LAW AND ECONOMIC TRANSFERS OF WATER:
                    A REJOINDER
                             Fnsz'.t J. Tnarsss
                            UnEven icy of Wyoming

      HIS discussion seems to he generating more heat than light. I make
 T    this rejoinder' in the hope of clarifying some issues, pointing out
 gune areas of agreement as well as disagreement between us and finding
 some common ground from which fruitful results can be obtained.
   First, I will accept Professor Gaffney's statement of the real issue; That
I lean toward the view that the appropilaUve doctrine- is essentially
Found, needing some repairs about the fringes; he to the vjew that many
diseconomies are inherent in the core concept of prior appropriation;
Secondly, that the situation he describes exists on the Kaweah I do not
doubt. That from this one can conclude that prior appropriation liw is all
bad I doubt very much. That legal factors, along with historical, physical
aad tempermental factors have hindered transfers of water rights in that
area seems to be true, but that this can be generalized over the west I
do:tbt.
 Joining Gafftiey squarely on the core issue seems to be difficult, because
be has chased me into the mists where my errantry and divagations took
t.snd there smote oe or two dragons hhnseli Therefore 1 will accept
  S ;Oziewflzt rcth deiineacn of my argument, and will reply to his
pontsashezndethea
1. The relative n&ts q appropriative law
  I do not condone every sin committed in the name of prior appropria-
tion. I do not approve evely variant nile of liw encompsscd within
that doefrmne. I do not defend every maladjustment the law has permitted,
every wrong decision, every result of maladministxatioa I do not defend
California water law in general; I regard it to a large extent as a chamber
of honors, with its ripar4in rights, appropriative rights, correlative rights,
and the hybrid monstrosities which have resulted from forced matings of
these doctiines. Even in regard to appropriative law, I do not defend the          -


prodiga]ity of the California courts in allowing inflated claims to water
nor deny that there is need to straighten out the bad situation that has
resulted.                                                        -
  A major difficulty in coming tops with Gaffuey is that his position
is essentially negative. He does not like prior appropriation but he offers
csno clear cut alternative. Poking holes in, or even destroying, a system
  'Heaven help us. in common law pleading there were once rebutters, surrejob4cn
nd surrebutters.
                                                                                              -—


    433                                  Nom                                          -




    is not enough; bad as prior appropriation s, what better can be offered?
    Re has, in his main study, not suggested, save by indirection, alternative
    policies?' In his rebuttal, however, he hints at these: definite and alienable
    claims on water, that are negotiable instruments. Re gives us a choice as
    to whether these should be mere piivileges, over which the legislature
    (state? administrative agency?) has complete control, or else rights bought
    at a market price so as to get a real title, fully alienable and fully taxable
    as private property. Re offers his study as proof that present policies are
    intolerable and posits the molding of new policies as one of the greatest
    challenges facing the economists' profession. With the latter I am heartily
    in accord, for the challenge faces the legal profession nd the public as
    well, and as I have said we need all the help we can get from people like
    Gaffney and from studies lice his. But his sketch of a substitute is too
    nebulous and ineotiiplete for us to judge whether the flame he offers is
    boner than the grease we presently sink in.
    2. California law on the tran4erabililg 4 nppropriative rights
      First I am accused, under the previous headin& of confusing issues
    by failing to distinguish between the transferability of appropriative li
    ceases and that of shares in mutual water companies.I thfrtk the confusion
    is caused by attempting to make the distinction. A thange hi point of
    diversion or place of use resulting from the sale and fransfer of water
               styk not appurtenant to land it a        in an appropriative               a
    right To unravel the tangle of legal and factual variations in the shttc
    ture hy-Jaws, and powers of mutual water companies is impossible here.
    Suffice it to say that while the company may he regarded for some ex-
    ternal purposes as the owner or proprietor of the water right, the share-
    holder, variously, is either the me owner of the appmpriatioxC or is the
               owner of a fixed o1ropornonate share of the company's water
    right, winch the compan holds in trust for hun. When the shares are not
    inseverably appurtenant to particular n a sale of stock by an outer
    with a low marginal revenue producfivity to a person who can place a
    higher value on the water results in a change of the use in response to
    economic forces, and the ownership, legal or equitable of the appropria-
    tion changes hands? This is not to say that the company Is entirely with-
    out rights in the matter, as the case Gafiney complains of indicates.' J1ae
    company may restrict its service area within fixed perimeters and such a
      'In one oi the cases axislng out of the KaweaL stiuggle. the purchase of stuck Li
•
    water ccmp3thes by diztdcts was said to be the equivalent of purchasing addrtlonaY
    water rights. YJndsay-Strathmorc lnigatiou Dst1ct v. Wutchamna Water Co. (CaL
    App. 1931) 296 Pat. 933, 937.
       Consolidated Peoples Ditch Co. v. Foothill Ditch Co., 205 CaL S4• 269 Pat. 915
    clan
                                                                                          -—

                                              Ncsrts                                437

        change may not operate in other ways to the disadvantage of the com-
        pany or the rest of its sharehoIders.
          Secondly, I am not in enor in attributing to California, and there
        applying to water company shares, the general rule that a change in water
        rights is pennissible only if no injury is done to other water users. This
        limitation bas been expressly held to apply to transfers of water company
        shares in the southern San Joaquin Valley.' Far physical reasons, one of
        the most common types of injuiy, the loss of the benefit of return flows
        from the diversion, may not apply, but purchases of shares of mutual wa-
        ter companies have been treated by the CsIifomia courts just like other
    -   tansfers of appropifative righit indeed held to be just such transfers.
        With specific reference to a change effected by a transfer of sbares to a
        city, a California court has said: 'lt is frue that such change in either the
        place or purpose of use may not be made to the detciment of others hay-
        ing superior xights?'e The detriment alleged in that case was that a change
        from agricultural to municipal use would result in a diminution in down-
        stream water supply available for recharge of aquifers, in other words, a
        loss of retuxn fiows.T [f there has been only wailing and gnashing of
        teeth at iuch &ansfers within the Icaweah Delta it may be because the
        lamentors 6uld not prove that they were hurt or abstained from going
        into court for some other reason. Actually, this adds fuel to Caffney's Er;
        1c it frnposes legal iimitthons he thought did not edst on transfers. But
        IthbL- that to the extent that economic transfen of water rights have been
        eectintec ty tansfers of water shares, appropriation law should be
        given the credit, rather than some unidentiSed law outside that frame-
        work.
          Thirdly, Caffney overstates his ase when be says that the' law inter-
        diets a cbaxige of divexsion and permits changes in place of use only
        when all ditches stem from the Lied ancient diversion points. IL Intuit
        that Caffney knows that this is not really the law and that this is * short-
      hand ecpression for his belief that whije the letter of the law permits such
      changes other ramifications take away what Is given. For It is clear that
    J changes in point of diversion bave been made in California,' even from
        a stream to a related &ott'S basin,' or tram one setök wells to an--
    (
        other drawing from the same basia'° And, although local infonnation

           Bdgbton Ditch Co. v. Englewood, 124 Cob. 366k 231 P. 2d 116 (1951).
          'Llndny.Stratknore Iriigaticn District v. Wutcbunina Water Co. (No. 2) (Cal.
        -Ape.Oranga
              1931) 296 Pac 942.

—                   County Water District v. Rivejside (C.L App 1QQ) MS P tI 40,484.
          'Sce an earlier ptuzss of the same case (CuL App. 1959) 340 P. 2d 1038.
            flyers v. Colonial Irrigation Co.. 134 Cal. Z53 66 Pae 732(1901).
            Sarton v. Riverside %VaterCo.. 155 Cal. 509. 101 Pac. 790(1909).
          'San Bernardino v. Rivenide 186 Cal. 7• 198 Pac. 734 (1921).
      433                                  NotEs
       a
      furnished to Caffney did not indicate this, a reported case records that
      in the neighboring Kings River Valley a 35 mile change in the point of
      diversion was allowed, upstream, in the direction of greater economic
                     -
      use.1
        One of Dr. Caffneys main complaints is that the law, by various means
      will not permit the sale of swplus by districts which have over-estimated
      their needs and laid claims to waters they may never use, and by odin
      appropriators with an excess over actual need. But in practice this effect
      may not work out too badly, if I may be permitted another supposition. If
      these excess waters are nat diverted and consumed by their "owner? th .j
2     are left in the streams and ai-e available to and are used by junior
    p9priators.Jt is true that these juniors hold a precarious title, subject
      to dcfeasance if the dieams of the owner of the surpluiever come titie.
      BuTWihe surplus were to be sold to those who would divert and consimie
      it, the juniors would be deprived of water they have used for years and
      can expect to use for years. This is a spillover I believe the law sbou!d :
      psevent. Had I the Eat, my solution would be barsber than that Cafinec
      proposal would not propose that the situation be corrected by permit.
      ting these people to sell what they do not own, but by a re-use of the ad•
      judication procedure, I would redetermine what Is and can be used and
      cut titles back to this. An alternative tecbnique might be that wbicb has
      been sometimes, but seldom, used by water disibution officials: cute
      down the amount of wat& delivered to an appzapñator to the ne.i
      amart he n beneficially us& These tstbnique would finn up the
      tide of the junior appropriators using the water claimed but unused i
      the seniors, and free the remainder for new appropriations.
      Sà.SpWov effects
        I quite agree that most public and private decisions or transactions have
      effects on otbers tban the principal parties. I cannot agree that in fields
      other than water the law wisely refrafns from considering spillover effects
      On the contnry, a very large segment of law and a large proportion of the
      work of courts is devoted to the problems of seeing that those who cause
      losses pay for them, and that those wbo reap benefits from conduct
      transactions pay the costs thereof. The Jaw reacts selectively to spiJlov&L
      those wjtb whicb ft (and I) are most concerned in this context are those

       "Caffney. tiseconomies Inherent in Western Water Laws; A Calffonh On
     Study" Proceedings, Western AgTICUIt Wit Economics Research Council, TuaC'-
     At. Jan. 23-24, 1961, p. 65. at uote 49.
       °Peoples Ditth Co. v. Foothill Inlga6oa DisSct (Cal. App. 1931) 291 Pac. 11-
           Parshall v. Cowper, 22 Wyu. 385, 143 Pac. 302 (1914); cf. Quinn v.
     Whitaicer Ranch Co., 64 Wyo. 367, 92 P. 2d 568 (1939).                           a




                                                              C
                                         Noms
that would result in depriving a third person of water. The state gives a
water right (license, privilege) to A, and another to B. A selis his to C,
                                                                                      439
                                                                                              -
and B now finds he is short of water. A common case is that of the irri-
gator who sells his gross diversion so that downstream juniors are de-
prived of return flows. Caffney gives us other illustrations more applica-
ble to the Kaweah Valley. A change in point of diversion that would
lower the water in the sfream and lessen the channel seepage or natural
recharge to aquifers would deprive ground water users of water, or pos-
sibly of a more valuable asset, a shallow pumping lift. This I think should
be accounted for, and so does the law," andl am not at all sure that this
is an 'uneconomic principle." The law does not protect the quite similar
conveyance losses from leaky ditches," perhaps it should. Deep percola-
tion under irrigated fields is a form of return flow and those who use it
would, I believe, be protected." Although California law does not protect
upsfream juniors agahist increases in channel seepage vliich result from
heavy pumping of wells; I believe it should. Wyoming's underground
water law, which I drafted, contains the only explicit stattitory statement
of this principle,1t although it has been recognized by courts else-
where'!                              -


  Neither the law nor I re entirely blind to spillover gains. One example
of their recognition in the water field is in the Federal Powcr Act, which
compels a hydroelectric power producer to pay for "headwater improve-
meuts benefits received by the downstream power.plant from the storage
capadts- of a new tçstreim niant)' In emioent domain, the law is slowly
but surely accepting the principle of set-off of benefits received from an
i2lproVe2leflt zgaitst the award for the taldng of property for the in-
provewent? To a large extent, bmvever, the law ignores the claims of a
volunteer who by his own property improvement benefits his neighbor.
Yet parties negotiating a tiansaction do not usually ignore collateral benc- -.
fits. Again, I can simply wonder whether the spillover benefits irom a real-

                v. Sander, 166 Wit 453,7 P. 2d 563 (1932).
  - Bower v. Big HolE Canal Assothtion (Wyo. 1957) 301 P. 2d 593.
  "Suprcn.t                                                                   -
    Wyo. Stat 1951 Sec. 40-133: Where uxzdcrpound waters In different aquilen
t'e so thtercounected as to constitute In fact one source of supply, or where under-
ground waters -and the waters of surface scrams are so interconnected as to coa-
flute in fact oae sourco of supply, priorities of rights to the use of tE such Later-
crninccted watcn shall ho contelated and such single schedule of priorities shall relate to
the 'vim!. mmou water supply. The state engineer may by order adopt any of the
Coneetivc ccnfroh specified in section 11 of this act.
    Tewpkton v. ?ecns Valley Axtesian Conservancy Dis&fct (N.M. 1958) $32?.
    I6USC.5ec803(f).
  "Nichols on Eminent Domao 3rd EL, Sect &62 ci seq.
                                                                                              -----a
    410                                     NoTES

    location of }Caweah water would accrue to those who suffer the spillover
    damages."
      Nor am I blind to the veto power which an injured person has over a
    change in an appropriative right The law almost universally tates that
    if damage will occur to other appropriators, the change shall not be madt
    Utah Is perhaps an exception its statutes provide, rather indefinitely, that
    no change shall be made if it impairs any vested right without just com-
    pensation.22 But this is weakened by a later provision that a change may
    be approved, though it would impair the vested right of others, upon con-
    &tion that such conflicting rights be acqufred. The Alaska legislature
    currently has under consideration a water code prepared by me as con•
    sultant to the state which would go farther, it provides, A change may
    be granted in part or subjected to conditions including the payment of
    damages to an injured person in order to avoid injuiy to private property
    or the public interest'"
       There i; anothcr doctrine with could ameliorate ths stuatiou, but
    which to my regret I have never seen 2pplied tà one of these cases. This
    is the denial of an injunction and the relegating of a plaintiff to an action
    for damages upon a "balan&g of the equities,' actually, an ovenvheka-
    ing balance of benefits to the defendant as measured against minor dis-
    advantages to the plaintiff. But further than this I do Dot believe the wcts
    should go. Save in the most indirect of spillovers, we rerve pow c!
-   eminent dcmain to the stator to businesses fairly obviously affected
    with a pablic interest, and righd hesitate to give our ndghb&s such
    power over our property.
      Gaffney would take such cases out of the couifl and leave the adjust-
    ment of gains and losses resulting from a transfer 10 the tender mercies
    of the tax collector. Perhaps the people vi]1 approve this; I had thought
    that if there was one class of persons whoze public image b worse than
    that of lawyers, It was the tax collectors, from the publicans to today's
    Internal Revenue Service.

    31,. On the iteirloom alt itudi'
      I have butiressed Gaffney on the existence of this attitud; but I still

       "U a smitten dragon may be permitted to snap back, the relevancy of the Luidsay-
    Sbathmore IrdgaUoa Distzict spending two-thirds of a mifliou ot more on
    counsel in an attewpt to establish water rights Is not apparent. After that mOy
    was spent and the suit lost, the district attanpted to buy water rigith from mon
    successful parties, but apparently failed to pay or offer the right amount to the ttgbt
    people,
       =    who promptly took then to ccwt My query related to the Tatter hansaCtfCt
         Utah Code Ann. 1933 Sec 13-8-3, £nt pangrapb.
        Ibid. third pancraph.
         S.B. 35q, Secon Alasica Legislature, Second Session (1962), Sec. 232(d).
                                        Noms                             441

 cannot agree that the emotional attachment to water rights stems pri-
 marily from the precariousness of the appropriator's title. Let me reiterate
 that I agree that an onmer" of surplus water has Indeed a precarious
 title, none save that given by lax judges and adminisuators, so that he
 rightly fears that the courts may some day review their mistakes. But I
 cannot admit that the run-of-the-mill irrigator putting all of his water to a
 recognized beneficial use has a precarious title. The Supreme Court of the
 t?nited States has said that an appropriative right edsts in perpetuity."
 State courts have protected vested rights in so many cases that the wall
 of precedent can never be breached without the, payment o( just compen-
 sation. That water titles are subject to possible recapture because the
 original transfer from the public domain was a giveaway of a public asset
 is nonsense. Land titles are not precarious because they are derived from
 homesteads. Cash payments to the state for water rights would not make
 the titles more "real."                                          -

   CaUing water "public' or property of the statC does not detract fiom
 the property aspect of the appropriatoti right to use that water. I may
 have fallen into the common parlance in explaining a concept to Texas
 law ers. I doubt that my audience misunderstood me, though it may seem
 doubletafic to some. Elsewhere I have explained the fallacy of attempting
 to derive a system of water law from such declarations of public owner-
 slip.:6 When the state allows the water to be used, it makes no difference
 whether the wozd tzed is pennit privilege, license, right or grant, so long
  te meanizg is understood in terms of the property Interest passed.
However, snth declarations have led to an attitude on the part of some
people that does givetise to feais on the part of apprbpriators andtauses
them anxiety. its is the feeling that water is different,' that the state
must keep water uses under constant review, that since today's best use
of water may not be tomorrosvs, the state must reserve the right to at any
tune reallocate the water to these now more beneficial uses. Compensa-
Uon is not mentioned by these people, since they think in terms of re-
vocable privilege and licens& Caffney's position on this mailer is am-
bivaient The western watt user, hearing these proposals, rigbtly pro-
tests the introduction of a system that might leave him wily dry land,
"ith his Investzient lost and his going concern destroyed.
t On the tawyt/s reçonsibility for the law
  Caffney's 'ast point astounds me. I did not defend (my] professionr
nor advocate that the lawyer abdicate responsibility for the law. My pro-
  = Arizona
              v. California, 283 U.S. 423 (1931).
  "Trekase, tonrcmeat Ownenbip and Trusteeship of Water," 45 CaL I.. Eec.
638 (1937).
                                                                                        -=


442                               Norrs
posed bill to reform Wyoming's water law so as to permit economic
changes of approptiative rights did not fail because I supinely yielded to
the strident voice of a minute interest group in the mistaken belief that
I beard the will of the majority. I ot soundly whipped. I have been
whipped before yet come up flghtng my 1955 underground water law;
for Wyoming was defeated, but my 1957 version was enacted. I have
recently re-entered the lists in Alaska, drafting a comprehensive water
code at the request of state offlcit Whether the legislature will accept
it or reject it I do not know, but I did not renounce leadership when
Fairbanks miners who feared curtailment of their activities tuned a pub- .
lie hearing into an indignation meeting.
                               Conclusion
  I would like to exd this round by touching gloves with Caffney, as cot-
legiate boxers do at the end of a match. Neither of us has pulled any
puoe!ws so far, though many a rcundhouse swing ba gmie wild. Perhaps
now we can take off the gloves. Neither Gaffney nor I like what he has
seen on the Kaweab. Both of us find much to aiticize in the law of prior
appwp&iation. Row far apart are we?
   if California bad had a different system of water law when the Kaweab
Delta was virgin territory, perhaps so many diseconomies would not have
arisen or have persisted so long. It Is too late to make a fresh start- These       -

dLceconcr1es now may n*er be solved, beca*qe the a ratf cc of. in-                  S
ported water has for whatever reason proved more attractive.
   I still believe that a team of lawyers, hydrologists and economists work-
ing for the districts, water companies and Irrigatorscould bave If they
bad come up with, enough facts, worked out a scbem for tedistribution
of water under the present law that would have placed the water where
it was most needed by the most economic means. This would have in-
clUded .a scrupulous identification of costs lad benefits and their re-
cipients, and a demonstration that fears of unlikely losses were irrational,
or an assurance that such losses were contingently recompensible at
prices that included a profit Perhaps there were too many people 'allo
disregarded the profit motive (the holdout for an unconscionable price.

't
the heirloom" holder, the bitter veteran of the 'seventeen yesxs war"
                     '°y) for aN this to be worked out volunta4
But the law offered another solution. There Is in existence in the area the
Kaweah Delta Water Conservation District which, assuming it is or-
ganized under the general California Water Conservation Acts, has power
to condemn, tax, and levy special assessments in such a way as to achieve
a close correlation between costs and benefits. I surmise that much of
this has been done in other areas of California. In speaking to a water last




                                                              t


                                                                                b
                                                Nons                                    443
_____-   espert on the poor economics of the rpariansystem. I was once told that
         I  5houid realize that today riparian rights in California are worth only
          aoIle, that the irrigator who formerly depended upon hisriparfan rights
         f'r water now receives his water from a district, and that his assessments
         ire adjusted to credit the value of his riparian rights against his share of
    •
         the costs of the &sWct The Lamé reasoning could work with appropri-
         aUve rights, rights to ancient points of diversion and the like.
            If these possibilities were too awkward, cumbersome, expensive or
         politically impossible because of local tempers and temperament to be ac-
         cepted by the residents of the Kaweah Delta2 Caffney must sbow that his
         system will be a more attractive alternative to residents of similarly af-
         iicted areas. For either a majority of the people of the area must accept
         this, or an outraged majority of Californians must impose it upon then
         for their own benefit; willy-nilly. The economist who would suggest a
         change has a responsitility to legislators and to• the people as well as do
         the !iwyers. It will not do to simply cifer an altes native on a take-it-or- -
         leave-it basis, as has been sometimes done, and curse the people as fools
         for not taking it. A new system must be sold to the people and to the
         legislators. I would like to see Caffney come up with such a proposal;
         I think I might like it veiy muck If I might make a suggestion for it,
         I think it might be built upon and derived horn present prior appropria-.
         Cn law. The modem law of prior appropriation, based on Elwood
         MtzLc 1553 Wvzz water ndrn?nictxation statute, was a far cry from
         the free prior appropriation that the pioneers knew. It was accept5ble to
         the people because it retained old concepts2 continued the old comforting
         phrases, while adding a mechanism that substantially changed practices
         and results.
           If Caffney's negotiable inshunient will have enough permanence to en.
         able a netv user to build a going enterprise, if it will guarantee that the
         holder can draw its face value in water, against holders of insfruxnents
         bearing a later date, or against loss when the holder of another instrument
         oegothtes it, I would favor calling it an appropriation, with priority,
         changeable in place of use and point of diversion. New meaban&ns for
         its issuance and traxisfrr, aDd for assessments and compensations for spill-
         over benefits and costs, would have to be carefully drafted to avoid any-
         ing fonvard all the old baggage of the old words. But such a compromise
         might carry the day, while a proposalto exactly the same thing, couched
         in terms of abolishing grandpa's good old appropriations and substituting
         something new and different, would be doomed to failure.
             = B.
                    Abbot Coldberg. Deputy Attorney General of California, c. May 15, 1951.
