      Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy*
                               By MASON GAFFNEY

This ARTICLE REPORTS what I as an economist think I have learned from
the experience of the western states in economizing on water, which may
suggest what eastern researchers might learn by directing some of their
efforts toward sifting and evaluating the western history. This is one area
in which history flowed backwards: the western evolution anticipated that
in the East by a hundred years. Learning from the West does not mean
copying the West for the West made mistakes as well as scored successes.
Prom the total experience I shall seek to distill what seem to me to be
general economic truths bearing on water resources.


WATER DEVELOPMENT is a fit subject for community action. There is
little real scope for a free market in water supply systems, which involve
economies of large scale all along the line, and particularly in distribution.
Water supply has all the qualities of a classic natural monopoly, and usu-
ally should be treated as such. This does not mean that the community
should not use good economic pricing and costing principles in planning,
fixing the size, delimiting, upgrading, setting a price structure and other-
wise managing its water supply system. It does not rule out consumer
sovereignty. It simply means that these economic problems need to be
settled in the public arena rather than in the market place.
  Western water users have had long experience with community organi-
zations at the local level—with commercial water companies, municipal
governments, mutual water companies, and a variety of public districts.
The most successful is a type of special service district called an "irrigation
district." These originated and have their prototype in California, but
have spread, with modifications, to all states.
  California irrigation districts historically arose from the extremity of
small farmers who needed an organization to provide them with an es-
sential service which otherwise would, because of its large scale, be the
sole preserve of giant landowners. Without districts, these giants would
have dominated arid lands agriculture, an outcome which was indeed en-
visioned and fostered by the Desert Land Act of 1877. For their success,
districts required three basic powers: taxation; bonding; and forced in-
  * This article is based on a paper delivered at a colloquium on "The Social Sciences in
Water Resources Research" at Pennsylvania State University on June 4, 1968.
132       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

clusion of lands within the economical service area. Taxation let them
engage in and cover the deficits of marginal-cost pricing, a practice es
sential to the best development of decreasing cost services. Bonding let
them build large works as units, ahead of demand, a practice necessary to
achieve economies of scale. Forced inclusion let them serve a compact
area, a practice essential to avoid dissipation of gains in fragmentation of
service area and "irrigation sprawl." In addition, it has proven vital that
their tax power be limited to bare land, thus avoiding focusing of taxes
on early improvers, fragmentation of demand, retardation of development,
and hardship on smaller landowners and intensive farmers.
   With these powers, small farmers were able to pool their economic
strength and develop water. Irrigation districts now serve over 4 million
acres in California. In these areas, subdivision of land into small farms
has been the rule, during a half century when consolidation and engross-
ment have been the paramount national trends. Irrigation generally pre-
supposes an intensive application of labor and capital to land, with close
management of small tracts. Small optimal scale of the farm unit in con-
trast with large optimal scale of the water supply unit led to waste wherever
one factor was allowed to override the other. This made it optimal to
separate the two functions: hence the great success of districts.
  The economies of scale achieved are in the main the following:
   a. Pooling of supplies to regularize the total. Water flows are a vari-
able raw material to their consumers, and whatever puts the supply on a
firm basis is of particular value. On top of natural flow variability there is
an added instability imposed on users when a river is divided among many
small claimants under various historical rights of use. A district pools
these various supplies and legal rights. Offsetting fluctuations counteract
one another, reducing aggregate instability and uncertainty. The same pool-
ing principle applies on the demand side as well.
  b. Water storage, surface and underground. Surface storage generally
enjoys large scale economies within the limits of the market, although these
are limited by the qualities of specific damsites. Irrigation districts have
built more and larger dams than any private agency, and are only outdone
by federal agencies. Many of the federal agency dams, incidentally, pro-
vide service for the primary benefit of those same giant landowners whose
size is often explained by their exclusive ability to achieve economies but
who have called in government to do the big jobs for them.
   c. Diversion from streams and pumping from aquifers. Scale economies
to these operations are fully realized at low volumes, but they are important
              Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy                133

in humid areas today because scale economies are usually first perceived
in diversion and pumping.
   d. Conveyance and distribution. Because aqueduct costs increase with
length of line, but only in proportion to the square root of line capacity,
nothing is so wasteful as parallel lines. The principle is nearly universal,
and results in distributive networks of all kinds being recognized as nat-
ural monopolies. "Bundling" of small individual water lines into large
ones makes it economical to carry water long distances, so much more
land may be served from a given source. It also makes it feasible to sup-
ply the peak demand capacity needed to provide water at all times.
   e. Financing. Irrigation districts have much better credit ratings than
their component members, and can tap national credit markets through
bond sales. The credit they receive is passed on to incoming settlers in
an interesting way. Note, first, that the conversion to more intensive
agriculture, and the payoff to the investment in water supply, presupposes
immigration. The small farmers who are willing to submit to the exact-
ing work of developing new farms are not wealthy, and they need credit.
Irrigation districts pass credit along to new settlers in the form of unap-
preciated land prices. It is not that districts depress prices—then there
would be little motive for the original landowners to form them. But
they prevent gross speculative increases, and they discourage holdouts.
That is because they tax land, and their bonds are liens on land. The
settler thus buys land cheaper, because it is mortgaged to the district. And
as he pays his taxes over many years, he pays off the mortgage.
  This feature of district finance is little understood, but is probably the
most important single factor in their success.
  f. Synchronization of interdependent development. The development
of new communities requires simultaneous risky investments by large num-
bers of independent decision makers. The success and viability of each
investment depends on the others. Whoever gets out ahead runs more
risk, and is in that sense exploited by laggards. A giant landowner can
if he will (a big "if") "internalize the externalities," and proceed on all
fronts at once, needing only confidence in himself. A community of in-
dependent men needs a community synchronizer. An irrigation district
serves the need. By this tool, the community as a whole makes the initial
commitment—and puts tax pressure on all its members to match up.
   Owing to decreasing costs in water supply, and its limitational nature,
the optimal water supply works are built ahead of demand. They must
come first. Immediately there ensues a crisis period—will the owners of
134        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

the served lands respond fast enough to forestall bankruptcy? There
must be a synchronizing mechanism to assure that they do.
   g. Compactness of settlement. By forcing inclusion of contained lands,
and limiting service areas, irrigation districts achieved great savings in
distribution. This saving in water supply cost, however, proved to be the
least of the gains. Every other distributive network—roads, power, tele-
phone, delivery and collection systems for farm inputs and outputs, etc.—
benefited as well. The purchasing power of many small farmers was
brought to focus on local towns, which responded with improved storage,
packing, shipping, retailing, farm supply, and so ad infinitum. Farmers
had closer contact with one another, virtually eliminating the need for
self-sufficiency and vertical integration which forces many isolated ranches
and plantations to be so huge, and paternalistic or tyrannical. The way
was opened for the development of "total community."
  Along with the benefits, the total community suffered some of the dis-
economies of regional specialization, as land taxes forced each parcel to
its highest use. There is a peak demand problem in seasonal requirements
for farm labor that may be aggravated by specialization. But irrigators
responded to this with a diversification to match the specialization—both
are possible when a high volume comes from a small area. The classical
evils of monoculture are the product of plantations, and have been overcome
by intensive irrigators.
  h. Management of aquifers As aquifers underlie large areas, and as
water is pooled in them, they require unified management. Irrigation
(and other) districts have undertaken this. Aquifer storage is cheaper
than surface storage as a rule, and with modern developments in pumping
and electric power distribution, aquifer management is the vital frontier
of water supply.
   i. Drainage. Every water supply creates a drainage problem, usually
for someone else. There is no money in water removal, but it must be
done, and it is obviously best done on a large scale under a unitary system.
   j. Multipurpose river development. Irrigation districts, as semi-public
agencies with tax power, have been able to justify devoting some of their
reservoir space to flood control power, and recreation.
  k. Marshaling social surpluses to finance social infrastructure. Eco-
nomic development of an area generates many spillover benefits and costs,
produced by some individuals but received by others. In general, the net
balance is strongly positive, that is, spillover benefits exceed spillover costs.
This creates and constitutes a social surplus. The surplus is indigenous to
a limited area within which economic development has occurred, and so is
             Economic Aspects of Water Resonrce Policy                 135

in the main captured by local landowners in the form of higher rents and
land values. Irrigation districts, having a first mortgage on this income,
can tap it to pay for prerequisite projects of large optimal scale. Thus
the surplus is harnessed to useful purposes.
   Surplus-generating spillovers are of two kinds: technological and pecu-
niary. The technological kind is easier to understand: if my irrigation
water, imported from a surface source, percolates underground, raises my
neighbor's water table, and reduces his pump lifts, he benefits. The pe-
cuniary kind is more important, more likely to be positive, more transcen-
dent of particular technologies—but harder for the concrete mind to grasp,
and therefore less appreciated. It comprises the benefits of "total com-
munity" discussed above (f, g).
   Pecuniary spillover benefits are not limited to physically adjacent lands
because they are transmitted not by touch but through the market. They
show up mainly in towns and cities serving farm hinterlands. California's
irrigation districts recognized this relationship long ago, and acquired the
right to include cities and to tax their lands at market value to help finance
the farmers' irrigation water. Far from resenting this, city voters have
usually supported irrigation bond issues by larger margins than the as-
sociated farm voters! In a few cases they have carried them over a neg-
ative majority of farmers!
  Crises of drought are socially useful in that they overcome inertia,
which is the paramount obstacle to economic development. Crises should
therefore be viewed as opportunities, rather than as catastrophes. The
continuing water crisis of southern and south-central California has made
this the most productive agricultural region in the country, and perhaps
in the world. The historical theory of "challenge and response" finds
strong support on the Pacific Coast, as one travels from south to north:
the humidity rises, and the agriculture declines. Community institutions
for irrigation are not easily accepted by complacent individual landowners
where there is no great crisis, even where there is great potential gain. The
community institution, when it does come, creates a man-made crisis for
all slow-adapting landowners, through heavier land taxes, and thus pro-
vides challenge and provokes response.
   Irrigation farming in the arid western states has had a powerful impact
on national markets The irrigation district device is the prime mover.
Heavy fixed charges on land prompt rapid, intensive and compact develop-
ment. This in turn fosters local markets and social life and "total com-
munity." It has made small farming economically viable, in a half century
when everywhere else the trend is toward farm enlargement. In the last
136       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

decade, it is true, there has been some reconsolidation inside irrigation dis-
tricts: irrigation farmers are not entirely immune from the same factors
of mechanization and finance and marketing that have favored consolida-
tion elsewhere. But a greater cause has been the retirement of old bonds,
and resulting reduction of land taxes and rise of land value as an invest-
ment for absentees. Whenever new districts are formed, or whenever
existing districts are revitalized by new bond issues, the tax pressure on
land is renewed and subdivision becomes again the paramount trend.
   Community action at the level of the giant private landowner, as en-
visioned in the Desert Land Act, remains a possibility. Historically, the
giant owners moved at a snail's pace compared with the irrigation districts
and played largely the role of parafeudal reactionaries. More recently
many of them have shown great enterprise, abetted by outside income and
the privilege of writing off capital investments in agriculture as business
expenses for income tax purposes. Their renewed vigor has easily cap-
tured the fancy of those who prefer private to public enterprise in all
cases; and it possesses a greater flexibility, thanks to the smaller numbers
involved in key decisions, and the relative freedom from institutional ob-
solescence. I remain a skeptic, however. Most of the giants report neg-
ative taxable incomes each year, indicating quite clearly the nature of the
motivation behind their enterprise, and its dependence on non-farm in-
come. Their special skill is holding land in the path of taxpayer-financed
new water projects, and lobbying for projects they prefer.

                                      II
OTHER LEVELS of community action are needed too. At the state
level, the primary need is for the state to define property rights in
water. In most states these rights are ambiguous and, to the extent
they are clearly defined, not intelligently defined. The ambiguity is
exploited by the possessors of superior rights to maximize their own
position, often at considerable social cost. This begins by their gaining
enjoyment of a public resource without ever paying the public anything
for it—often euchering the public into paying them to develop it—and
then denying that the valuable resource they enjoy is taxable real property.
The whale structure of property rights being raised on this foundation of
double-think, there is resistance at every step to economical measures de-
signed to rationalize systems of water allocation.
   In some areas the state can also serve a wholesaling function vis-a-vis
irrigation districts and other local groups as retailers. That is, it builds
and administers trunk lines. It probably should apply on regional levels
many of the same principles which irrigation districts have made work on
              Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy                  137

micro, local levels, but no state has to my knowledge done so—a pity.
This has resulted in great magnification of cost of state water supply proj-
ects, and deferment and destruction of benefits.
   Federal action is necessary to define interstate water property questions.
Other federal participation has many marks of the porkbarrel, doing for
states and localities what they could and should do for themselves or, more
often, what should not be done at all. There has been great obsolescence
of institutionalized intent, with irrigation water supply and navigation
taking priorities that today should go to pollution abatement, and perhaps
mining, municipal, and industrial supply.
  The riparian doctrine of water rights is not suited to conditions when
water becomes scarce. As increased demands on fixed supplies make water
scarce in all fifty states, the riparian doctrine needs simply to be abandoned
everywhere. It fails on several criteria.
   a. Initial allocation. Water is reserved for the owner of riparian land,
in proportion to the area of his holding, regardless of productivity. Only
by chance would these lands be those where the water was most productive.
  A pernicious byproduct is a bias against subdivision, except in long nar-
row "bowling-alley" parcels, on the French pattern, which are uneco-
nomical to use. It is no accident that the riparian doctrine is identified
with large landowners.
  b. Motive to develop. The doctrine in its original form does not con-
template consumptive withdrawals of water. They may or may not be
allowed—in many jurisdictions one simply does not know until he has
tried it. Consumptive use is possible only by modifying or departing from
strict riparian doctrines. Generally such departure is allowed, but thence-
forward the entire fabric of law rests on a principle that is being denied,
leading to the kind of confusion and uncertainty that was once associated
with a geocentric theory of the heavens. "Oh, what a tangled web we
weave, when first we practice to deceive." Better not to base an institution
on a lie,
   Another problem is that water storage is not permissible under riparian
rights.
   In western water history, riparians have played a dog-in-the-manger role.
The doctrine was used to claim the right to stop others from developing
water which the riparian was not using. He felt no pressure to develop
it himself. He lacked a need; he lacked a right to export to lands that
had a need; he paid nothing for it; and he couldn't sell it. The com-
bination was so anti-developmental that the doctrine had to go, and in most
states it did.
   c. Constraint on uneconomic use. The riparian's right to daim water is
138        The American lournal of Economics and Sociology

not limited by economic use. There is more question about his right ac-
tually to use water, since that is limited by the claims of downstream
riparians. But there is no limit on his right to claim that the original
flow of the stream, undiminished and unpolluted, should reach his land.
   d. Rationing under scarcity. When a river goes low, riparian rights are
often prorated among riparians in proportion to their landholdings. Pro-
rationing is an uneconomical principle of allocation, however common in
many walks of life. Cut back everyone by 25 per cent and some will
miss the marginal water very little, others a great deal.
  e. Transferability. Riparian rights are rigid and non-transferable. They
are part and parcel of a landholding in the most complete sense. They
can be disseverd only by the owner's failing to assert his right against
an adverse use which establishes a prescriptive right—but then how trans-
ferable is the prescriptive right so established? As to selling, the only
thing a riparian can sell is an agreement not to assert his rights, but that
is of little value to most buyers because it does not bind other riparians,
each of whom has something like an absolute claim on the natural flow.
There is a recent water rights settlement on the Kaweah River, California,
where a block of riparians accepted money as part of a complex settle-
ment in which they agreed not to push the nuisance value of some ancient
unused rights, but that is a rare bird.
   f. Pooling for cooperative community action. The riparian right is tied
to the individual parcel of private land. The concept of pooling supplies
in a community system is alien to that concept. In those rare cases where
riparian rights have been pooled, it is by such devices as computing con-
tinually what the natural flow past the riparian land would have been
under natural conditions, and supplying the owner that amount through
the community system, regardless of cost and competing needs. Imagine
a city water supply system in which each household had to be located on
a stream, and divert and process and return its own water. Fortunately,
the law gives a priority to domestic and public interest uses which lets
cities override riparian constraints and avoid such absurd outcomes. But
outside cities, in the looser organized unincorporated areas of the world,
exactly such absurdities are forced on agriculture, industry, and mining by
the riparian doctrine where it prevails.
  g. Management of aquifers. Ground and surface water are both water,
and they intercommunicate in a grand system. The riparian right applies
to the surface subsystem, and owing to its historical priority, imposes on
aquifer management the responsibility of preserving the status of the sur-
face subsystem, even where that involves much lesser values than the under-
ground subsystem. Thus, pumped wells near a stream, especially on an
               Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy                   139

alluvial cone with coarse gravel, may effectively divert water from the
stream, and be enjoined by downstream riparians. The aquifer must then
be managed in such a way as to preserve the original natural surface flow.
This is an increasingly wasteful requirement as it becomes realized that
good aquifers are a valuable resource comparable in value to water itself.
  h. Containment of service area. The riparian service area is contained,
generally quite narrowly, but not in a rational way. One riparian's land
extends back many miles from the stream; another may be just a few feet.
There is generally a prohibition against export over a watershed line, which
again serves to contain, but not necessarily economically—the best use of
water may be over the line, and there are dozens of cases in point.
   i. Distributive equity. The riparian system divides up water rights es-
sentially in proportion to the prior ownership of land. Thus, a valuable
public resource is given away to those who already have most resources;
there is no equipoise for others. We live in a world of curious double
standards and compartmentalized thinking. In discussing problems of
the Negro ghetto, and the urban dispossessed, we immediately look to the
suburbs and find our villains in middle-class salaried and professional
people who have worked their way out of the slums. We propose and
invoke redistributive taxation with a right good will. But in discussing
the ownership of property, that's different. Here, few seem to question
the propriety of "To him that hath shall be given." As a salaried pro-
fessional person who burns a lot of midnight oil, I find this irksome. If
the dispossessed have a claim on society, would this not be better asserted
through a public claim on natural resources?
   The appropriative doctrine of water rights is no answer to the faults of
the riparian doctrine. Judging it on the same criteria, its faults are dif-
ferent, but no less disqualifying.
   a. Initial allocation. "First in time, first in right" is the operative prin-
ciple. This is clearly pro-developmental, but it goes too far and fosters
premature development. The reason is that water is everywhere in tran-
sition from being submarginal to being a valuable rent-bearing resource;
and under this doctrine, one seeks to capture submarginal waters in order
to enjoy their later rents. To capture the waters one must invest real
social capital in diverting, storing, and applying water. Capital is diverted
from socially productive uses to this factitious task of capturing submar-
ginal resources. In today's capital markets, with real interest rates on
mortgages rising to 8 per cent, wouldn't it be nice to have back some of
the concrete frozen in the premature and abortive Feather River Project,
for instance?
   b. Motive to develop. The motive to capture is clear enough, and that
140        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

involves a certain kind of development. Excessive diversion capacity is
the rule. What one does with water after diverting it is something else
again, and most appropriative takings of water are characterized by in-
adequate investment in post-diversionary aspects of development, espe-
cially those designed to save water.
   c. Constraint on uneconomic use. The appropriator's motive is to use
as much water as he possibly can. Withdrawing water, a social cost, is
to him a private gain, because it is the basis of his claim to future water.
So appropriators learn to live in an environment where it is considered
socially creditable to overirrigate. Much of the water "shortage" of the
arid west would disappear overnight if appropriators had to start paying
an economic price for water; and it would be greatly abated if they simply
started thinking in terms of a zero price, instead of, as now, regarding
the price to be negative because of the gain they realize by piling up a
great "history" of "use."
   d. Rationing under scarcity. Under the "first in time, first in right"
doctrine, appropriators are senior and junior to one another along a scale
from the first to the last. X"hen water falls low, the juniors drop Out
first and lose everything before the next senior appropriator loses any-
thing. In result, there is no pooling of risk whatever. The top senior
has a 100 per cent firm supply; the last junior has a supply so uncertain
it is unusable. Two basic economizing principles are denied. One is
marginal productivity. The junior appropriator who loses all his water
obviously loses marginal units of high productivity, while the senior re-
tains marginal units of low productivity. The other is pooling of risk.
The doctrine is conceived in terms of an assumed necessity for vertical
integration: that is, there is no market for the raw material, water, but
every user rather owns his own supply. His supply is a piece of the larger
common supply, but his piece is defined in such a way as greatly to in-
crease the aggregate variability of supply above that which nature imposes;
to increase the uncertainty as well; and, finally, to distribute these risks
unequally.
  e. Transferability. Appropriative rights are more transferable than
riparian rights, but the advantage is nothing to crow about: it is the super-
iority of 2 per cent efficiency over 1 per cent efficiency. The reasons are
complex and lengthy. The empirical fact is undeniable. There is no
market for appropriative rights worthy of the name. They simply are not
bought and sold freely, despite crying needs for water transfers in every
area. Anyone who comes east touting the appropriative doctrine by virtue
of its greater flexibility bears examination—a very searching cross-examina-
tion in search of factual evidence.
              Economic Aspects of lVater Resource Policy                 141

  f. Pooling for cooperative community action. In this particular, ap-
propriative rights rank reasonably high. A public agency, formed to
rationalize a multitude of individual rights, may acquire them and manage
them centrally, provided they serve the same lands from the same points
of diversion, and again provided that one agency does not try to acquire
water from another—the flexibility is largely within agencies, and within
areas of land. Most of the irrigation districts described earlier operate
with appropriative rights.
   g. Management of aquifers. Appropriative rights to surface water often
interfere with and take priority over aquifer management, in the same
manner as riparian rights.
   h. Containment of service areas. Here, the evaluation is mixed. Where
administered by irrigation districts, appropriative rights are applied to
contained service areas. However, that is more to the credit of the dis-
trict institution than the appropriative institution. Where claimed by in-
dividuals, or small individual districts, service areas from given streams
open to appropriation are generally scattered. "First in time, first in right"
puts the premium on jumping the gun. The farther one is from a source,
and the more convenient it is to others, the greater the motive to get
there first to preclude them. So, typically, the first claimants on a source
are scattered; soon the supply is fully claimed, and the included dry lands
can never get water from this source. They can, however, search about
to tap other sources, remote to them. The results need not be imagined,
they may be observed throughout the arid states.
   i. Distributive equity. The amount of water that complaisant courts
will recognize as being used "beneficially" is a function of, among other
things, the amount of land that the user has to apply it to. So this doc-
trine, like the riparian, tends to distribute public water to those who al-
ready own private land, in proportion to the size of the landholding.

                         III
AQUIFER MANAGEMENT presents problems. The cheapest way to store
and treat water is in an aquifer provided by nature, where one is ac-
cessible. The modern frontier of water management is in unitized aquifer
management: recharge, containment, and control of withdrawals, and
conjunctive use of ground and surface water. Present ground water law
suffers the same cultural lag as that for surface water. The law gen-
erally contemplates perfect vertical integration—in this case quite literal—
between the aquifer and the overlying landowner. Of course, this is
hydrologic-economic nonsense, and the result is waste of many kinds.
  The failure to economize on valuable rent-bearing waters in locations
142        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

of water shortage leads to costly development of submarginal waters.
There is little in the law to suggest that anyone understands that water
occurring naturally in southern California, for instance, is worth just as
much as water that is conveyed there at high cost, and should be priced
and economized upon accordingly. The tendency is to waste local waters.
This magnifies many fold the cost of water supply. Institution-builders
need to take drastic steps to overcome this glaring fault in water law.
  Water in locations where water is scarce is a rent-bearing resource. De-
veloping water need not, therefore, require subsidy; on the contrary, it can
yield a surplus, and should, through the imposition of prices collected by
the owner of the water—preferably, in my judgment, a public body of
wide jurisdiction.
  A water system consists of several subsystems with different economic
characteristics. While the "production" end of the business yields rents,
the local distribution subsystem is a decreasing cost operation which, if
properly managed with price of service equal to marginal cost, yields
negative rents, or specious deficits.
   It is fairly common for the management of a complete system to ar-
rogate the surpluses from water production to cover the deficits of dis-
tribution. This is a bad practice. It results in excessive extension of
distribution systems, and inadequate economy of scarce waters in arid areas
of high demand.
   The major cost in water supply is conveyance and distribution. It is
largely a study in transportation economics. Dams and reservoirs are
photogenic and have memorable names, but aqueducts, canals, ditches,
pipes, siphons, checks, pumps and furrows eat up the money. Hence the
overriding importance of keeping service areas compact, and exploiting
local sources before ranging over long hauls for remote sources.
  Very few lands and waters are adequately served with high-quality
distribution systems, with pressure for sprinklers and excess capacity to
supply water on demand. Limited capital funds are squandered on ex-
cessively long lines; on excessive diversionary capacity; and on premature
capture of submarginal waters. Not enough is spent on raising line ca-
pacity and quality.
                                        Iv
WATER IN MOST USES evinces diminishing returns.    From this fol-
low some important corollaries. One is that user charges on water
can cut back marginal consumption, and rise quite high, without driving
land out of use, because the average product of water is very high. User
              Economic Aspects of Water Resource Policy                 143

charges will cause water to be spread thin, and serve a great deal more
land.
  A second corollary is that water supply is necessarily political. "People
will vote for water, but pay for power" is the aphorism. In light of the
diminishing returns to water, this makes some sense. Water supply is
a small tail that wags a very large dog. It is a limitational input—no
water, no life—---and yet a very small part of the total capital cost of de-
veloping land. This helps us understand why westerners are willing to
invest in what seems like such an extravagant manner to assure themselves
a water supply, but refuse to pay in user charges anything at all compar-
able. This is, of course, compounded by the appropriative doctrine, and
as much more so by the variability of the natural supply. Hirshleifer,
Milliman, and De Haven devoted a chapter of their excellent book on
Water Supply to refuting the notion that "water is different," and made
many excellent points; yet it would be hard to name an input at once so
essential to life, and so variable in supply. Some stream flows jump up
and down from 20 per cent or so to 400 per cent or so of their mean
annual levels, in addition to seasonal patterns. Cydical storage from
wet years to dry is very costly, owing to the infrequent use of the storage
space. There being no market for raw water, every city and farm or
farm group must acquire its own individual source—pure vertical inte-
gration, a market structure that everywhere magnifies aggregate need for
raw materials. If it wants a firm supply, it must hog enough natural flow
so that the minimum expected flow will cover its needs. If it expects to
grow, it must add yet more, to serve the undeveloped lands already within
its boundaries (remember urban sprawl?) plus lands it hopes to annex.
In light of these relationships it is to be expected that water seekers would
depart widely from standards of economy.
   To the extent that the problem is man-made, institutional that is, it
is curable. I look forward to better and better systems of pooling water
supplies. This will not come through an open market in raw water, be-
cause transportation cost is the major cost, and a natural monopoly, owing
to decreasing cost to aqueduct capacity. It will come through making
water a public utility over wider and wider areas, on the model of the
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. But whatever we
do it will have to recogniae that water is in some ways different, and it
is these differences that will continue to make it more political than most
raw materials need to be.
  A third corollary is that standby capacity to serve water on demand is
as important as water itself. In order to justify other investments, land-
144         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

owners need assurance that their limitational water supply will not run
out. The assurance of firm water permits great intensification of land use.
    The cost to the supplier of water is therefore largely the cost of sup-
plying capacity—a fixed, not a variable cost. The benefit to the user
 is also a fixed function of time more than of use. If the seller has to
 rely solely on user charges, he finds that most of his volume sales come
when water is abundant and the marginal value is low. And of course he
has acute financing problems if he has to rely on periodic spurts of in-
come to cover regular fixed costs.
  And so it makes great sense for landowners to pay for water supply
systems as one pays for insurance, on a fixed periodic basis, independent
of use. Only at times of peak demand will there be a scarcity, either
of raw water or system capacity, to ration. At other times, having the
excess capacity, user charges should be very low.
  A fourth corollary is that pricing of water should be very flexible. Peak
demand needs can be greatly reduced by letting user charges rise to high
levels when system capacity is loaded. Here I go down the line with
Hirshleifer, Milliman, and De Haven. Price rationing is far superior in
many respects to alternative methods; and the absence of any peak ration-
ing leads to great waste in unneeded capacity.

                                      V
THE ECONOMIC SUCCESS of water supply investments depends on the
availability of multiple quantities of capital in complementary public and
private investments. At a time of acute capital shortage and high interest
rates, like right now, a prudent man or community should not plunge
into an ambitious scheme of community development in the absence of
compelling counterarguments. This is less true in the humid states, where
water supply may often be viewed more as a supplemental investment in
established communities than the foundation of a complete new commu-
nity. But the difference is one of degree only, for artificial water supply,
if optimally developed, brings a new standard of intensity to an existing
community, with economic effects not unlike those in the arid states.
  But life cannot stand still because of high interest rates. Rather, we
must take greater pains to economize on capital. To that end, the com-
bination of land value taxation and legal reform sketched above becomes
more urgent than ever.
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee
