         Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, I
                             By MASON GAPFNEY*
                                   "Ye build I ye build! but
                                     ye enter not in."
                                       Lyms FIUNnEY SIG0URNEY

                               I
                         Introduction
PRESENT DOLLARS are heavy dollars; future dollars are light dollars. The
effort of taxpayers to retard tax liabilities and advance tax write-offs fol-
lows as the night the day, and economists understand the rudiments of this
game: taxes deferred are taxes denied.
   The economics profession has Jagged in developing capital theory and
more so in incorporating it in its teachings. It is catching up, but the
particular application to tax policy still lags.1 This is a serious omission,
since taxation has the most profound effects on the intertemporal alloca-
tion of resources and, by retarding replacement of capital, on gross invest-
ment and national income.
   This study purports to help recover the lag; to develop the thesis that
excise and income taxation as practiced today bias investors toward the
future; to specify a modified definition of depreciation that would remove
the intertemporal bias; to advance the thesis that tax neutrality requires
that we tax appreciation and deduct depredation at the time they accrue;
and that these reforms would convert the income tax into the property tax.
   The early enthusiasts of income taxation believed that the tax would not
much bias resource allocation because that use of a resource which yields
the highest returns before taxes still yields the highest return after taxes,


   * 'With mathematical appendices by Michêle Consigny. The writer thanks die depart-
ments of economics at the University of Wisconsin—Milwaukee and the Universities of
California at Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, and the real estate research department at
the University of California as Berkeley, for criticism offered at seminars on the subject
of this paper; and MichIle Consigny for criticism and assistance. (A short version of
this article appeared under the same title in Western Economic Journal, Vol. S, No. 4
(September, 1967), pp. 308—23.
    1 The lag does not suggest complete neglect. The timing of tax liability and write-off
were matters whose importance was evident to Irving Fisher, with his proposal for an
expenditures tax; William Vickrey [38, 7, 137—38]; Henry Simons, who emphasized the
desirability of taxing asset appreciation currently rather than waiting for realization;     F

Harold Hotelling, who advocated defining depletion as the drop in value of a mine due
to use, a lesser figure than the spot value of minerals severed [18, 170]; Richard Mus-      F

gray; who seeks a basis for a neutral depreciation schedule (23, 338—44]. But none of
these dwelt on the question long enough to integrate the pans into a general theory of
the subject, or arrive at operational results.
26            The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

all returns being reduced pro rata. L. C. Gray applied this principle to
one instance of intertemporal allocation, mineral conservation [15). He
noted that a mineral should be extracted when the percentage growth rate
of its net value falls below the interest rate; and that that percentage
growth rate was the same after taxes as before.2
  From that he conclhded that a tax on land income could be free of inter-
temporal bias. We have no major quarrel with that finding, although
much depends on how the tax is announced. But Gray's example is quite
a special case, where investment at time zero consists of foregone gain on
early realization of a rent. We will see below (Section V) that such pas-
sive investments automatically receive unusual tax treatment—they are
"expensed"—written off as current expensesimplicitly.5
  In the more general case, early costs are written off over time or at
maturity. Then income taxation loses its intertemporal neutrality. Still
Gray's demonstration holds forth the hope that we might devise a tax
system free of such bias. This paper has both aims: to demonstrate that
prevailing tax methods bias investors toward longevity; and to show how
we may modify the income tax to remove the bias.
  The importance of the subject for micro-economics is self-evident: i
bias towards longevity keeps sovereign consumers from getting what they
want. It ties up scarce capital in trees or premature utility extensions
yielding society, say, 4 per cent yearly, while small merchants and manufac-
turers cannot finance inventories that would yield, say, 15 per cent, and
would also sharpen competition.'
   The importance I or macro-economics is even greater. Almost everyone
has learned to eschew the "broken-window fallacy" (that even wanton
destruction is healthy because the replacement employs people); and
hardly anyone endorses planned obsolescence as a means of increasing
employment. Economists do not like macro-economic benefits that vio-
late micro-economic principles. And, although we have accepted many
wastes in the name of full employment, we cherish a particular distaste
for artificial acceleration of turnover and replacement.
  2   R(i—t) RD = (1 + i) ", when = net revenue of mineral severance, with Sill cons
      R,(i
        —t) it.
assumed current (a very limiting assumption).
  5atse the resource whose gains are foregone incurs no tax liability in the year
when committed to a long term investment. To anticipate Section V, expensing is
tantamount to tax exemption, which accounts for the seeming absence of bias. It is not
the rent which is exempted, but interest on deferral of rent.
   'Small businessmen with weak credit ratings are on the whole the more competitive
£rnu in the economy. Because of their weak credit they tend to specialize in enterprises
where the capital turns over faster, and the marginal rate of return is higher. These
more competitive £rms are the ones our tax system bits harder.
                   Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, 1                               27

   This is not to suggest accelerating replacement by any artificial means
that would impose micro-economic wastes. But what if there is a large
institutional bias that artificially retards replacement? We would expect
economists to oppose it for both micro- and macro-economic reasons.
We will show that excise and income taxation do just that. The macro
losses of slow replacement were long ago outlined by Bohm-Bawerk and
Wicksell,5 and more recently restated by Domar, Dorfman, Terborgh,
Brems, and others,6 and we will not labor them here. The micro losses
will be obvious in our exposition.
   The importance of our topic to the distribution of wealth and the alloca-
tion of resources is manifest in the fact that higher income groups take
higher shares of their income in the form of capital gains, a fact of mod-
ern life documented in many recent studies.' The taxpayer gains from
the lower tax rate on capital gains, of course. But even at equal rates he
would gain by the deferment of tax liability, and this second benefit often
outweighs the first and affords the paramount motive for arranging one's
affairs so as to convert ordinary income into capital gains.
  To the extent that taxpayers can convert ordinary to gains income by
mere paper manipulations, the effect is only distributive, an important
matter in itself. But there are few paper manipulations without their real
counterparts, and the general effect of this tax-avoidance maneuver is to
reallocate real capital. Investments that pay out fast lose their lustre rela-
tive to alternatives that pay out slower. Tax bias makes pie in the sky
look better than pie on the plate. Capital moves into growth situations;
submarginal utility extensions to capture remote future markets; minerals
exploration far in advance of need; premature research; building up farms
by current losses for future gains; elbowing for Pacific airline routes that
might yield returns some day; purchase and development of exurban land
for appreciation; tree farms; institutional advertising; grandiose visionary

        . - any given total of present goods, be it large or small, is sufficient to purchase
and remunerate the total supply of labor. . . - All that is required is to bring about a
corresponding contraction or extension of the production period." 14, 354].
    "If - - . a shorter period of production . . . is adopted, . . . the capital which was
before insufficient is now able to give employment to all workers." [42, 127. See also
131—33, 14-46, et passim.] See also Wicksell's Lectures on Politicd Economy [41,
172—78].
   6 See Domar, Essays in the
                              Theory of Economic Growth [9, 33]; Dorfman, "Waiting
and the Period of Production" [11]; Terborgh, Bogey of Economic Maturity [37]; and
Brems, Output, Employment, Capital, and Growth [5]. Other economists writing on
the macroeconomic importance of replacement frequency have been Senior, Ricardo,
Von Thunen, Jevons, Barone, Akerman, Spiethoff, and Hayek.
    See Internal Revenue Service, study of 1962 tax returns, reported in Business Week,
Feb. 11, 1967, p. 90.
                                                                                            *1

28          The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

enterprises of all kinds. Meantime, capital neglects more pressing immedi-
ate and intermediate needs and opportunities: operation and maintenance
of central buildings and rental property; adequate inventories; tools and
machinery; developing and extracting known mineral reserves; rolling
stock; poultry and hogs (which mature faster than cattle); vegetables
(which mature faster than fruit); prosaic "fillers" needed to complement
the visionary "builder" investments in every industry. Those are faults of
which we love to accuse the Soviets; but before picking the mote from
our neighbor's eye, let us check with our own ophthalmologist.
  The bias is to neglect immediate opportunities in favor of Boulding's
"benefits hereafter" with the associated benefit of taxes hereafter. A
review of the .diany specific maneuvers by which corporations and people
of means avoid taxes suggests that the allocation of capital has become
downright dominated by the motive to defer tax liability—a motive which
our mathematics will demonstrate, and which is not hard to credit in an
age of tax rates at 50 per cent and more.
  In an age of such high tax rates, again, we may dismiss the old red
herring that investors are not rational enough to follow the thinking in-
volved in maximizing their after-tax returns, or even in distinguishing pre-
and post-tax returns. Surely there is great irrationality to be observed on
every hand; and Ezra Solomon has recently shown that conventional ac-
counting practice usually misstates true rates of return.0 At the same time,
rates of interest on tax-exempt municipal bonds are advertised in the daily
press specified to four significant figures, suggesting that someone calcu-
lates alter-tax returns carefully. This generation of lawyers and accoun-
tants has made a major profession of "tax engineering," and one may take
their growth as prima fade evidence that tax avoidance has become a major
determinant of investment decisions.
   On the other extreme, some mathematical readers may regard our argu-
ment as too obvious to labor. If we do draw that response, we will con-
gratulate ourselves on a successful conversion and take some credit for
having made it so obvious. As indicated at the outset, Professors Simons,

       memory serves: 0fl modern industry, research
                          Has become a kind of church
                          Where rubber-aproned acolytes
                          Perform the ceremonial rites
                          And firms spend funds they do not halter
                          In hope of benefits hereafter."—K. BouwING.
  'Solomon's "Return on Investment: The Relation of Book Yield to True Yield' [3OJ.
Among other things, he shows that conventional practice usually overstates the return
on longer maturities relative to short. So if irrationality does prevail here, it may re-
inforce the bias to longevity.
                 Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital, I                         29

Fisher, Hotelling, Vickrey, Musgrave and other have all anticipated parts
of our thesis. But the most recent of thes; Professor Musgrave, left the
subject, which he treats by an arithmetic example and a trial-and-error
approach, with the observations that, ". - . the problem does not lend
itself to a simple mathematical solution. .. ." t23 340] and "... the task
of formulating a truly neutral-depreciation policy becomes exceedingly
complex." (23, 343]. It is this exceeding complexity which we believe
we have overcome Another prominent tax economist, Professor E Cary
Brown, has reached a conclusion the reverse of ours, with much laying-on
of hands.'° On different grounds, Professor Stephen McDonald has main-
tamed that business income taxes are biased against capital-intensive indus-
tries.1'
   Obviously our finding should not appear trivial to those who teach that
an income tax need not deflect resources from the uses they would other-
wise have: we find that it does. Our analysis will also discredit the belief
that an excise tax may be neutral so long as it is general Most important,
our analysis will suggest that macro-economic policy makers need attend
 to the effects of tax and depreciation methods on the longevity of invest-
ments and thereby on frequency of reinvestment
    For introductory expository purposes, it is useful to divide real assets
 into four classes with different major traits, which we will treat in order.
There are
    i Appreciating assets, like trees or cattle, whose primary yield is their
 salvage value at maturity These obviously benefit more than other assets
 from deferral of tax hability (except that most inventories, which fail in
 this class, have lives too short to receive any benefit in practice, or much
 in theory) This is the "point-input," "point-output" case
    2. "Pull salvage" or constant value assets. This is a model case that is

    10 See Brown s "Business-Income Taxation and Investment" [6] The denial is on
page 129 of the reprint Selection by Editors Musgrave and Shoup does not, of course,
imply their personal endorsement of every position held by each contributor. Indeed,
Professor Shoup s article in the same volume [29] might be construed to hint toward the
opposite conclusion, s e the one we endorse. Inclusion does imply, however, that the work
is regarded by elders of the profession as a "classic." Professor Musgrave elsewhere [23,
337, n. 1) refers to this work as "the basic article" on the subject although, again,
Professor Musgrave's text on pages 340—42 of the very same work finds a bias against
short investment. So his own position would seem like ours rather than Brown's.
   11 Stephen McDonald has maintained that business income taxes are biased against
capital-intensive industries [21]. For a summary of extended subsequent debate between
McDonald and several critics, see S. McDonald, "Percentage Depletion Expensing of In-
tangibles, and Petroleum Conservation," [22]. Professor McDonald, like ourselves,
finally finds a high degree of neutrality in the long-scorned property tax. For that
position see McDonald, "The Effects of Severance vs Property Taxes on Petroleum
Conservation" [20]
30         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

useful for exposition because of its analytical simplicity. It may be
approximated by the milk cow. The asset costs C0 dollars at time 0;
yields a regular income for m years of life; and then returns a full salvage
value of Cm dollars, the same as its cost It neither appreciates nor depre-
ciates. It is like a time aeposit from which one regularly withdraws all
the interest.
   3. Depreciating assets, like plant and equipment. These yield a regular
cash flow that includes both income and return of capital. Here, the divi-
sion of gross income between taxable income and capital recovery is more
difficult than in the simpler cases 1 and 2; but we will expound a technique
for doing so which can be applied to other assets as well, and which, ap-
plied to determine deductible depreciation, could remove much of the
intertemporal bias from income taxation. Assets depreciate over time both
because their life expectancy declines and because they yield less each year.
The first is analytically simpler if taken alone, and, for expository clarity,
on this basis we subdivide class 3 into: a. Assets yielding a constant cash
flow over finite lives, and depreciating only because they approach end of
life. (Anyone who has dealt in the academic flesh market will recognize
this concept.) b. Assets yielding changing cash flows over finite lives.
Usually the change is negative, but many assets yield undulating returns
and we will ultimately frame a general formulation to cover all cases
 (Appendix II). Initially, however, we expound the simpler case 3a.
   4. Land. Here there is infinite life. Partial depreciation is possible due
to declining income, but appreciation is more common and may continue
indefinitely. Here, as with case 1, the possibility of tax deferral is a
maximum. There can be no tax bin to construct more durable land, of
course, since it is not produced and its longevity comes from nature. There
can occur, however, an interclass distributional benefit to owners of this
asset; and within the class a special benefit to holders of appreciating land.
There can also be a special incentive to investment in what Wicksell called
"rent goods," i.e. nearly permanent land improvements like filling in
shallow water sites, or damming up artificial lakes to sell lakeside lots, or
grading and filling land for subdivisions. These improvements are closely
associated with land. They take on some of the qualities of land itself, and
often are realized on only by selling lots.
  For brevity, we omit paper assets from the list, with the thought that
these are ultimately claims to real assets, so that our list is reasonably corn-
prehensive as a beginning. But certainly paper operations like the plow-
back of corporate earnings to convert stockholder income into later capital
gains, or the assignment of earnings to contingency reserves, are central
                Tax1nduced Slow Turnover ot Capital, 1                    31

to our subject and warrant early attention. Again for brevity, we asswne
that our investors are self-financed and cannot deduct interest from taxable
income. When interest is deductible it adds some interesting wrinldes to
the analysis, but in essence it merely adds a step without changing the
basics, for what is deductible to the borrower is taxable to the lender.
   We assume expectations of no change in tax rates, and we ignore the
progressive rate structure. It has been suggested that investors expect to
move into higher brackets and so prefer present over future tax liabilities.
No doubt such cases can be found. We suspect, however, that a large
share of investing by individuals is done by older people nearing retirement,
with the prospect of lower marginal tax rates. To resolve that question
is beyond our present scope.
  We assume away the possible acceptance of a lower rate of return on
shorter maturities due to liquidity preference In a perfect market that
should not be a factor anyway, since longer maturities are liquid through
resale or hypothecation Our conclusions need to be refined to take ac
count of the fact that, under taxation, the investor, to gain the benefit of
tax deferral, has to avoid sale, i.e. is "locked in." This itself destroys any
perfect market in long maturities and should make investors require a
premium for loss of liquidity when they invest long. However, they can
borrow on these assets, and so liquidate them without sale or tax. Perhaps
the major problem to note here is that the opportunity to achieve tax
avoidance by deferral tends to be invidiously reserved for the rich and
creditworthy who can afford to absorb any loss of liquidity and whose loss
is the least because of better credit ratings.
   It is also often assumed that investors accept lower returns on shorter-
lived investments because of lesser risk. We reject that assumption. It
would involve transferring an observation (a questionable one at that)
from the bond market, a sanitary refuge where there are no price risks,
but only lenders' (credit) risks and risks of general changes in interest
rates, to the firing line of real goods investments where there are a dozen
more risks.
    Consider the investor as the residual claimant on the product ova
time The leverage on his share of the product varies inversely with the
period of investment To earn 5 per cent in one year, in a point case, the
investor must sell a $100 investment for $105 A 5 per cent drop of
selling price below his expectation wipes out his income completely To
earn 5 per cent in 56 years, he must sell for about $1,600 A 5 per cent
drop of selling price scarcely ruffles his return It would have to drop by
$1,500, or 94 per cent to wipe out his income
32          The American Journd of Economics a,zd Sociology

   So we doubt if in pre-tax equilibrium longer investments require a risk
premium any more than shorts, and for brevity we assume no premium
either way.
     With those preliminaries and ground rules, then, let us lay out the
effect of tax avoidance on investment longevity in the four basic dasses
of real assets. We will first show biases withiaT each class, and later com-
ment on interclass bias.
                                 (Continued)
Resources for the Future, Inc.                  -
Washington, D. C. 20036

                  Econombis and Sociologb/s Needed
A CONTINUING RECRUITMENT PROGRAM for persons with background in
economics and sociology is being directed by New York State's Narcotic
Commission to meet the demands of its expanding program of treatment
and rehabilitation of drug addicts, Commissioner Lawrence W. Pierce has
announced.
   Qualifications for positions with the commission in this area include a
bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university and a profes-
sional background in economics and sociology. Annual salaries for these
positions, when they are available, range from $7,200 to $16,490, de-
pending on experience and qualifications.
   The program, initiated in April, 1967, by Governor Rockefeller, pro-
vides for the commitment of court-certified addicts, followed by a re-
habilitation program having the broadest applications. Induded in the
program are medical care, grpup counseling, psychiatric and other re-
habilitative therapy, job training and placement.
   To maintain the high standards set by the commission's program, per-
sons with formal educational training and practical experience in social
work, education, psychology, sociology and law, are frequently needed
to fill important civil service posts.
   Information about the program and employment opportunities can be
obtained by writing to the personnel director of the State Narcotic Com-
mission at Executive Park South, Albany, N.Y. 12203. (From the Com-
mission.]
        Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II
                             By MASON GAPFNEY
                                                                                   -.
                                         U
                                Appreciating Assets
Wn BEGIN with a simple "point-input point-output" model investment
approximated by a tree plantation. All cost, C0, is incurred at the begin-
ning of year 0; all returns come at the beginning of year m (maturity).
There are no intermediate explicit revenues or explicit costs, although of
course there are implicit interest costs every year, and implicit site rents,
and implicit income through appreciation.
   In the absence of taxes investors adjust to an equilibrium so that trees
of whatever maturity yield the same yearly rate of return, i. Each tree has
two values: a liquidation value for immediate harvest; and an investment
value for buying and holding toinaturity. The investment value begins
at the planting cost; C0, and grows at the rate of interest The liquidation
value is always below the investment value except at snaturity when it
catches up by virtue of faster growth. At this point both grow at the rate
of interest; i; thereafter the liquidation value would have grown slower,
which is why maturity had arrived?
  Some trees mature fast, others slow, others slower yet in pre-tax
equilibrium, prices and costs all adjust so that each has an optimal maturity
year when it yields i percent; that is when investors do harvest them; and
this represents a normative condition in which the sovereign consumer
reigns and rules.
  Algebraically, the equilibrium condition is:
(1)                                (1+i)m=Rm
where       is the ratio of stumpage revenue in the year of maturity, m, to
planting costs, C0. If you prefer, B is revenue per dollar of cost; or it
is revenue on the assumption that        $1.
   Now the state imposes an ad valorem severance or excise tax, i.e. it
takes a fixed percentage, s of the gross value of stumpage. The investor's
rate of return alter tax, r, is, of course, now reduced below 1. But the
reduction is not uniform. The longer the maturity, the less the reduction.
Let us show that algebraically:
(2)                            (l+r)mcl(m(I_t)
   221n a more refined model we would include a separate term for land cost and allow
for some shifting of the tax into lower site values- See below under V, Land, for &
preliminary model giving separate ueatznent to land.
180       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

whereristheyearlyrateofreturnaftertax
       m is the year of maturity
            is the revenue in year m per dollar of cost in year 0
       t is the tax raèe.
Substituting from (1):
(3)                      (1+r)m=(1+i)m(1_t)
Solving for r:
(3a)                 r—(1+i)(1—t)"—l
  In (3a) one may see thatr varies with m, because (1—t) <1, and
the higher the root of a number less than one the higher the value of the
root, approaching unity as a limit when m is very large.
  Thevalueofrvariesfroznalowwhenmitoahighwhenm—co.
When m — 1:
(3b)                r1— (1+i)(1—t) —' ..ti(1—t) —t

This r1 will actually be negative whenever >           , i.e. for all tax rates
equal to or greater than a value just below the interest rate.
  But when m —
(3c)                     r=(li-i)(1—t)°—lni.
The taxpayer achieves full tax exemption by investing in a tree of infinite
maturity. Of course, there are none such, but the point is that r approaches
iasyinptoticaliy as m rises and the investor achieves a high degree of tax
exemptionbyinvestinginatreeofsay,soyears'life. IfialOpercent,
t—50 per cent, and rn—SO years, then ra(1.1) (l—.5)"°_l—l.l
x.986—1 —.0846, or about 8.5 per cent, a reduction of JOP or 15 per
cent, from i. Thus a fierce nominal tax rate of 50 per cent on gross in-
come has been tamed to a meek 15 per cent of net income. Among other
things we now begin to see why timber holders fight so hard for severance
taxation. It is virtual tax exemption for them, especially in the West
where maturities are long.
  Algebra asid; whence springs this bias? Basically it is from the de-
fermi of tax liability inherent in longer maturities. With each passing
year the taxpayer defers taxes not just on the value accruing in the current
year, but on the sum accrued in all prior years. The value of this deferral
grows with time so as finally to dominate the mgttn•
  Thelawtaxesincomeifandwhenitjsrealizegjincash. Buttheine
vestor constructively receives income at the time it goes to work nr&ng
more income for him. The investment value of timber (different, recall,
from the liquidation value) grows at compound interest That means
                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover 0/ Capital, II                       181

that each year its value grows enough to earn interest on the interest ac-
cued the year before, as well as that accrued from all prior years. (Money
makes money, and the money money makes makes more money.) Thus
the investor has contrived to receive his income and reinvest it, but without
yet paying a tax on it. (The money money made paid no tax before mak-
ing more) He can even realize this income in cash, by borrowing on the
collateral of the appreciated asset, without incurring tax liability, and
deduct the interest payments to boot A tree is like a corporation that
pays no dividends for decades but plows back all its earnings to increase
its assets and let the shareholder take his income as deferred capital —.
  At the short end of the continuum of maturities, the rate of return after
taxes is dominated by the fact that the excise tax on gross sales taxes not
just net income, but also the turnover or recovery of capital. That is why
the after-tax income can actually become negative for short maturities.'
The power of tax deferral to afford tax exemption is dramatized when we
note from our earlier example of a 50-year maturity and a 10 per cent
before-tax true yield, that by waiting 50 years a taxpayer — a major
exemption of net income from the nominal tax rate, even though he is
being taxed on gross income!
  But at the short end capital recovery is the lion's share of gross receipts
andtheexcisetaxcutsdeeplyintonetincome. Anotherwayofperceiv-
ing the bias toward longevity is to see the ndse tax as a tax on real capital
turnover—not on turnover in the exchange sense of passing from hand to
hand1 but in the basic Wicksellian-Austrian sense of a cycle of real invest-
ment and real recovery of capital. Each time capital cycles, in this sense,
it is taxed. The tax-avoiding investor naturally therefore moves toward
investments that cycle less often through timt He thus minimizes his
burden, both by lowering its total value and by deferring it.
  A tax that is interteinporally neutral would lower r by the tax rate for
all lives, so that r-i(1-t) at any maturity. For the excise tax there is
only one intermediate year of maturity when r — i(i — t), and it is simply
thebalanceofthetwobiases.14 Forshortmahzritiesr.ci(1—t) because

   12 If iJ0 and t .co, then for all maturities less than 6.6 years, r<O. In general,
the investor must hold long enough for money to double at the before-tax yield before
the after-tax yield becomes positive, since the tax takes half the gross.
    14The year is the is that satisfies equation (3) when rei(i-t). Substituting and
solving for is we get:
                                mnn (1—t)_
                                    tn
if t—3 and inIO%, rn—il years.
182         The American Journd of Economics and Sociology

the excise tax base includes capital recovery as well as income. For longer
maturities r>i(1-t) because the benefit of tax deferral comes to out-
weigh the fact that capital recovery is taxed.
  In summary, then, the severance or excise tax on gross receipts is doubly
biased toward futurity because it both taxes capital turnover and defers
thetaxonunrealizedincome. Itismorebiasedthananytaxonnetin-
come. Wehaveexamineditinsomedetailbecauseitistheflrstcasepre-
sented and many readers will appreciate careful orientation; and because
in some ways it is the simplestcase, useful as a point of reference in more
cumplexcases. Itisalsoimportantinitsownright:alargeshareoftax
revenue is from excises on gross sales, many of them sales of appreciating
assets.
  Next; consider how the bias changes when the flsc lets the taxpayer
deduct his costs. A gross bias is removed—no longer is capital recovery
taxed. But the benefit of deferring tax liability is still a motive for tax
avoiders to lengthen maturities.
  It is here that we run counter to Professor Brown's conclusion on the
subject. He based his analysis on the present value of depreciation
(henceforth PVD). He noted that the longer write-off is deferred the
less is the PVD for any dollar of cost; and from that concluded that, "This
effect may change the ranking as to their profitability of various outlays on
durable goods Shorter-lived assets would move up the scale relative to
the longer-lived." [6, 529].
  We agree with Brown that the PVD is lower for longer maturities
(assuming that write-off dates in practice retreat in step with cash flow,
which we will later question). But we believe he overlooked the larger
point that the present value of the tax liability itself also falls with futur-
ity.15 And since the gross tax liability is greater than the write-off (so
long as there is any net income), the net bias is still toward longevity.
   Letusnowmodifyequations(3) toshowtherateofreturnaftertaxes
when the base is not gross sales, but is net income over costs. Here the
taxpayer may write off or deduct initial cost; C0, from taxable income,
exempting capital turnover from taxation. This moderates the bias to
futurity, but by no means eliminates it, as we will show.
   The thning of write-off is important. We begin with the most plausible
assumption, that costs are capitalized and written off in the year rn, when
    isThis refers to the tax liability that would be due at the beginning of any given
yearn if It Is deferred one year ton+1. The effect Is veiled by the fact that additional
income accrues during year n, just enough to offset the drop in present value, so the
present value of the growing tax liability is always the same since it grows at the rate of
interest.
                   Tax4nduced Slow Turnover of Capital, ii                             183

they are recovered. This is the actual practice with timber planting
although subject to some chiseling.
   Nowtherateofreturnaftertaxis:
 (4)             ra[(1+i)m(1_t)+t]hlm_1
Equation (4) is like (3) but for the addition of the write-off to the right
side. It appears as the unwritten coemcient $1 before S in the brackets—
$1 is theinitial cost C0, andthevalue of the write-off is S per cent of $1,
or just S.
  Here again r varies positively with m, although not so obviously as
before. We will demonstrate this by graph and by calculus, but first illus-
trate it by a numerical example.
                                       Table I
   RATES OP RETURN AFTER INCOME TAX AT DIPPERENT MATURITIES
     (when the rate before tax is constant at s%, write-off is In year of maturity,
                                  and tax rate is 10%)
                              PolsS-hsuS $Mt-ost ssS case.
                               (1 +r)— (1.0S)a (%) + 54
       a                     (i.Og)S                    (1 +r)                   r           H


       1                      1.050                      1.04                   .040
       1                      1.469                      1.24                   .043
      10                      2.119                      1.1$                   .047
      11                      3.172                      2.09                   .010
      20                      4.661                      2.53                   .013
      21                      6.548                      3.92                   .016
      10                     46.902                     23.91                   .061
     100                   2199.79*                   1100.40                   .072
      00                                                                        .0*

   Whenm.1, r— (1+1) (I—t) +t—lsi(1—t). That is, for sone-
year cycle, the investor bears the full nominal tax rate. Unlike the excise
tax the income tax exempts his capital recovery, and so his income is tea
ducedbynomorethanthenoininaltaxrate,andthereisnostageof
negative rY
  But for longer cycles he bears less than the nominal tax rate, as witness
Table 1, which anyone may duplicate (toni standard interest tablet
   11n this introductory paper we omit the treatment of cycles tinder one year. Here,
so much depends on administrative practice and tax dates that a quick theoretical general-
ization based on simple assumptions would be mhlea.1h.g Suffice it to observe that LLS.
practice ii diligent in preventing kiting practices which would benefit short investors.
For example, a business is taxed on increase of inventory in a year, preventing anyone's
deducting coats a year before incurring tax liability. This strictness contrasts with the
laxity for long investments, and adds to interteinporal bias.
184        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

That is less interteinporal bias than the excise tax exerts, but still great.
Further, the advantage of deducting costs looks dimmer when we note
that the tax rate, t, must be higher under the income tax to yield the same
revenue, since the base 4s smaller; and the impact of any bias increases with
the tax rate.1t
  A simple graphical exposition is in Figure 1. The semi-log scale has
several properties that help us visualize the case:
—any straight line from the ordinate represents a constant percentage
growthratefromthey-interceptvalue. ThusthecurveRa(1+i)shows
the growth of $1., the intercept whence it begins, at i per cent, the equi-
librium rate of interest In equilibrium without taxes, all investments of
$1 grow to touch this curve at maturity.
—the steeper the straight line curve, the higher the value of I it repre-
sents. Thus a set of rays from the origin, as shown, represent different
rates of return on $1 of initial cost. Negative slopes represent negative
rates of return. Doubling the rate of return doubles the slope.
—constant vertical lengths represent constant percentage changes, so
Rm(1t) is represented by a line parallel to Rm, as shown, representing
 50 per cent of R. for all values of m.
—any curve radiating from the origin that is concave upwards represents
 a rate of return that rises with vi, since it cuts continually higher straight
 rays from the origin. The lump sum received after taxes at maturity must
describe such a curve, since it begins at 1 when mO, because (1+r)
(1i-i)° (i—t)÷t—i. The curve rises slowly at first, and then ap-
proaches asymptotically the lower parallel curve, La (1 - t).
—any straight curve ennnating from an intercept below I represents like-
wise a rising rate of return on 1, since it cuts steeper and steeper rays from
1. But it represents a constant rate of return on the intercept value. Thus
the curve shown, R.a (1 — t), represents a constant return of i per cent on
an initial investment of (1 —t), in this example 1/2. So, as we see pres'
ently, if the fisc puts up half the initial investment by letting the taxpayer
expense capital outlays it can take half the gross receipts without lowering
his rate of return at all—and without gilning anything for the govern-
ment except a market return on its own investment.
—the most convenient way to convert the graph into numbers is to think
of money doubling every so many years at different interest rates. The

    'tBut we would ivoid much emphasis on the last point, because if we brought land
into the analysis we would see that the seemingly lower tax base of the income tax is
made up by the shifting of the tax benefit into land renu, which are still part of the
income tax Lnsç.
               Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II                   185

numbers shown refer to5 per cent, at which money doubles approximately
in 14 years. (For computer programming, this fits the binary system
nicely.)
   From Figure 1 it is now evident that after-tax returns corresponding to
constant before-tax returns get higher and higher as maturities lengthen.
In the absence of any write-off the effect is much stronger: rates of return
after an excise tax are shown in the slopes of rays that cut the lowest curve,

                                   Figure 1
                  Growth of Investment, at cowound interest
                                                                                  1]
                            before and after taxes
  Log
scale

   16


    8


   4


   2


    1
                    14            28            42

   1.
   2

( 1— t). Write-off tempers but does not eliminate the effect: rates of
return after an income tax are represented in the rising slopes of rays that
cut themiddlecurve,Bm(1—t)+t.
   The decline of the present value of depreciation (PVD) with rising m,
the point Professor Brown stressed, may be visualized as the diminWilng
vertical distance between the lower two curves as m rises, if we draw
from any point on the middle curve a straight line parallel to the lower
curve, its y-intercept is the present value of the middle curve discounted
at i per cent. As m rises, this y-intercept falls, indicating a falling present
value of the lump sum which the investor keeps after taxes. This fall is
186         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

due to the falling present value of t x 1. This 'would seem to — to
Brown's condus ion that investors would favor shorter maturities to ad-
vance their write-oils. We believe this to be an error.
  The fallacy lies in u4ng the wrong rate of interest i, for discounting.
We are here concerned with taxpayer incentives and the taxpayer is moved
by r, his return after taxes, and not i, which includes the fisc's take. If
he discounted using i, all the present values of after-tax returns would be
less than $1, an impossible result since no one would pay $1 for an asset
whtse present value was less than $1 and there would be no investment
at all.Th
  To confirm the need to use r instead of i for discounting future rebates,
the following is conclusive. Assume a point case, and a rebate, W, due
in year m. To begin, (1jr)m_(1÷im+W
                                /  m The question is, is
that ratio, obtained by adding Jr to revenues at m, equal to the ratio ob-
tained by substracting discounted Wm from costs at time 0? Discounting
at i, the answer is no: the result is an inequality. But discounting at r:
                        I
      (1 +i)m+'W,,, —            (1+i)m           =      (1 4-i)
                            c_wm(1+r)m                r'-.O_W
                        (1+i)+Wm_Wmn(1+i)
                                        0=0

   Returning to Figure 1, any ray from the origin that cuts the middle curve
has a lower slope than the top and bottom curves. Consider the topmost
ray. Any parallel line above it cuts the middle curve farther to the right,
tnd has a higher y-intercept, indicating that at the rate of return which
the taxpayer uses and which guides his behavior, the longer maturities have
higher present values. Of course the topmost ray may not be the equl.
libriutn r; but whatever ray does represent r it has the property that all
longer maturities have higher present values, and all shorter ones have
presentvalueslessthan$1 andwillnotbeinvestedinatall.
  We believe that the present value appmach is clumsy for this purpose,
and henceforth will write In terms of r as a function of m. We did think
   t5Tlils sante basic error appears consistently in Prof. Brown's sequel, 'use New
Depreciation Policy under the Income Text an Economic Analysis" (7]. It is, however,
avoided by Prof. Musgrave, who scrupulously distinguhhes before- and after-ui rates
of return (23, 339]. (Musgrave denotes our r as It. Musgrave uses his It to discount
future write-off rebates to present values in his equation (14—17) wherewith he analyzes
straight-line depreciation. We follow the same practice for all cases.)
                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II                           187

it necessary, however, to meet the Brown argument in its own terms, for
in those terms it can seem quite convincing. The simpler refutation is to
note, as we have, that r rises with in. Another refutation is to note that as
m rises the taxpayer's loss due to deferring writeoff of $1 is exactly offset
by his gain from deferring taxes on recovery of $1, leaving him a net gain
of deferring taxes on all income above the initial $1 of costs. Thus Brown
reached the wrong conclusion by spotlighting a lesser factor and omitting
a greater one."                                                        ir.ri
   For a rigorous general proof that r rises with in, it is necessary to find
       0. The proof is not trivia!, and appears in Appendix L
  So far we have not discussed shifting the tax, but assumed it fell wholly
on the nominal taxpayer, the investor. Some readers might think the kiter-
temporal bias would disappear as the tax is shifted, but such is not the case.
Indeed, shifting is never automatic but results from reduced supply, so
only the absence of shifting is consistent with neutrality in taxation.
   In this case two concepts of shifting are entailed: first;, shifting away
from capital, which would bring r back up to the initial level of        (the
base interest rate), and would push iup to a new level, i;and second, shift-
ing among maturities, which will occur whether or not the total supply of
capital changes, and whether or not r reattains the b level.
   The two concepts of shifting are separate, but related, because shifting
to longer maturities has much the same effect on the bargaining po wtt of
capital vis-a-vis labor as emigration, consumption, or hoarding of capital—
the other avenues by which it flees from taxation and shifts taxes. Longer
maturities imply a substitution of capital for labor, as Wicksell showed,
hence a reduced demand by capital for labor and a shifting of the taxto
labor in the form of lower wage rates and/or higher prices.'0
    Shifting among maturities is inevitable, because in after-tax equilibrium
it is the value àf r, not of 1, that investors will tend to make the same for
all maturities. They will do so by shunning short investments in favor of
longer ones, until the premium of short i over long i is enough to equalize
short and long r.

   "By way of analogy: "There was a young lady of Crete
                            Who was so exceedingly neat
                            When she got out of bed
                            She stood on her head
                            To be sure of not soiling her feet."
                                 —Thanks to Miss Ann Gafiney
   O Longer maturities, however, increase the demand for land. Each module of "frozen
labor" now requires more years of land-time before liquidation, so the effect is to worsen
the bargaining position of labor st-s-sb land. See also note 1.
188        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
                                                                                       It
   Even if the aggregate capital supply were wholly inelastic, the supply
at each maturity is still elastic because capital shifts into longer maturitIes.
This elasticity of supply at any maturity is what lets capital shift the tax
off the particular maturities on which it falls heaviest and spread it among
all maturities.
   Graphically one may visualize this On Figure 1. Imagine that the middle
curve, Rm(1 - t) + t, is a curve in the road that Paul Bunyan wanted to                 ft

straighten. Assume, further, that most economists remember their native
folk legends. Paul hitches Babe, the Great Blue 0; to the end of the
curve and with a mighty — pulls it straight!
  This orthopraxy is not achieved without some side effects. The top
curve is rigidly connected to the middle one by the requirement that they
differ by t(R—1). So the top line develops a curve. It becomes con-
cave downwards, a mirror image of the middle curve shown on Figure 1.
This mirror reflects the fact that i, the gross-of-tax rate of return, must
now be higher for shorter maturities, in order that r be the same for all.
  Stephen McDonald has developed an ingenious thesis about such shift-
ing that might temper the basic effect. He points out that shifting by
industries whose operations entail shorter maturities is easier because the
gross returns comprise less return on capital and more return of capital, the
second representing payments to labor and other initial inputs. Indeed,
McDonald goes so far as to conclude from this that the tax biases investors
against longer maturities. We believe that he has taken a responsive,
equilibrating effect and made it the prime mover, overlooking the initial
cause: the force that initiates shifting is a move to longer maturities. The
McDonald effect" might temper the primary movement but could not over-
power it because without the initial cause there would be no McDonald
effect. Shifting may or Say not be easier at shorter maturities, but what
reallocation does occur will have to be toward longer maturities.
   We believe that McDonald's thesis is also open to the criticism that
slower maturing investments, while the value of their final product con-
tains a high interest component as timber, also consume yeats of land-
time and have a high component of land rent. So while shifting to labor
is harder, shifting to land is easier, and it is not certain that on balance
the longer maturities will impede shifting.
  We began by observing that the timing of write-off is important, and
assuming that it occurred at maturity, m. Now let us see how advancing
the date of write-off affects intertemporal bias. We will show that it
   21We do not here judge the quantItative importance of the effect. which we regard
as plausible and ably arped but as yet mgot. See also note 11.
               Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, Ii                  189

appears to reduce intertemporal bias but that the appearance is deceptive
because it does so only by elimbiating the tax [23, 343—44].
  Let w be the year of write-off. We have so far let w = m. Now let
w - rn-i. The write-off now yields the investor one yen's interest before
maturity so the value to him at vs of the two lump sums he gets is
Rm(it)+t(i+r).
  Note that the year's interest gain to the investor Is at the rate r, and not
1. ristheratewhichhecangetandkeepforhimselfbyinvestingthe
write-off dollar a year before maturity. To compound the write-off at the
rate i would overstate its value to the investor.
  Now let w fall, and t(l+r) rises. Interest earned by the write-off
dollarhelpspaythetaxatm. Aswmovestowardzero,themiddlecurve
inFigurelbothrotatesupwardandstraightensout. Jfthisisnotintui-
tively obvious, it becomes so when we consider the extreme case when
w -0, i.e. when the taxpayer may write off capital investments as though
they were current expenses ("expense" them). Then, interest earned by
the write-off dollar pays the entire tax at all maturities, and the middle
line becomes the same as the top line.
   This straightening indicates the removal of tax bias. By letting investors
expense capital investments we have removed bias from taxation. This
discovery might be a boon to minkmnd like fire or the wheel but for one
flaw: it also eliminates the tax.
   Algebrikally, the point is clear by solving fort when w -0.
(6)               (1 +r)m_ (1 +i)m (1 —t) +t(1 +r)mo
                    (1+r)a (1—t) = (i+i)a (i—t)
                            (1 + r)m — (1   + i)
The taxpayer gets the full rate of return. All the (xx gets is a market
return on its own investment of t per cent of $1 at time zero. The easiest
way in general to view this case is that the taxpayer and the fisc have been
partners in this investment. The fix puts up I per cent and the investor
(i - t) per cent. Each earns i per cent on its share of the investment
   It would be misleading to thigk of expensing as an approach to nen-
frailty, therefore. A neutral tax must first be a tax. It would also be mis-
leading to think that some halfway measure lice making w =             would
lessen intertemporal bias, for that would reduce revenue and require a
higher tax rate to nithitnin revenue. That would actually increase bias as
may be seen by shifting the lowest curve in Figure i, Rm(1t), down-
wudt
190         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

   But while expensing does not convert the income tax into a neutral tar
                                                                                              I
on that capital which turns over, it does contain an important element of
neutrality which we have not brought out yet. Land does not turn over
and the Internal Revenue Service, although it does many strange things,
in this case quite properlykand logically rules that land purchase is not a                   H
cost and may not be depreciated and written. off, much less expensed.
Expensing effectively exempts from tax the income of expensible invest-
ments, but not of land. Thus it tends to convert the corporate income tax,
which exempts wages, into a tax on land income."
   Since land income is rent; the tax may be neutral. However tax neu-
trality requires more than a base which is rent, Le. a base whose supply
withinthetaxjurisdictionisflxed. Rentisasurpluswhichmaybeprc-
served unabated by skillful taxation, but not one which cannot be destroyed
by taxation. As a means of taxing land rent, expensing of capital invest-
ments under the corporate income tax has some merit, but on the whole
seems to us less promising than the conventional approach of modifying
theadvalorempropertytaxtoexemptcapital. Sowewillnotpursueit
other than to snmrnnrize the faults we find:
—expensing in practice discriminates against investments of less than one
year's maturity (which are a large share of the gross investment flow)
because the tax calendar is discontinuous. To achieve exemption, an 11-
month investment would have to be expensed at the beginning of month 0
and taxed at the beginnhig of month 11; in practice it would be taxed and
expensed simultaneously."
—expensing can only be neutral for long run decisions ix ants the invest-
ment. Lx post, all short run decisions are biased by the tax rate on gross
cash flow, which operates just like an ndce tax. This rate might have to
be higher to compensate for exempting so much.'4 The short run bias
would then reflect back and affect the long run decision cx ante invest-
ment, since the investor would anticipate his later short run reactions
Only if the initial investment were completely irreversible and controlling.
so no later adjustments were possible, would the tax be neutraL

    "Or 'dd, if the fi Sna1l tax rata on the rsn.hang crnw. Congress Lu
been generous In extending the expensing privilege to oil men, for example, but then it
also exempts their rent income by the depletion allowance.
    "In addition, the current "investment tax credit," a species of partial expensing, Is
not fully allowable for investments unless their life exceeds $ years, a most explicit bias
against short maturity This and other measures suggest it actually is the intent of
Congress to favor long maturities.
   24flj is advanced tentatively, because some of the advantages will be shifted to land
rent, and still be part of the tax base therefore. 'We have reserved treatment of this
important issue for a sequel.
                                                                                           i)

                 Ta-Induced Slow Turnover 4 Capital, Ii                          191

—the advantage of expensing is denied to new, small, and losing firms,
which have no outside income against which to write off new investments.
—after write-off in time zero the investor is locked in, i.e. he cannot sell
an immature asset in year n without incurring his accrued tax liability,
whereas if he holds to maturity he defers the tax accrued by year n to year
vi without increasing its amount, a dear gain. Thus the market in longer
maturities is virtually destroyed. The net toss of investor welfare, as earlier
noted, is mitigated because the assets are still bankable; but an economical
allocation of resources may be blocked, and vertical integration to defer
tax liability receives a big boost with resulting damage to competitive mar-
ket structure.
—in practice, investors have learned to disguise land purchase as purchase
of old buildings on land, and write off much of it, often more than once.
Unless this practice were drastically reformed, investors would expense
land purchase too and the tax would have little or no base at all.
—taxation of the current yearly appreciation of land prices, which is in-
come just like appreciation of tree; would still be deferred until sale, or
if never sold, forever. Land appreciation may be converted to cash at any
time, not just by banking on it (mortgaging it) but, more commonly, by
consuming the cash recovery from other asset; especially the buildings on
the land in question,2° and relying on the land value increment as the
sinking fund.
   Universal expensing of capital investments would have the very real
advantage of making general one invidious advantage now granted a-
plicitly to oil (Intangible" well costs and dry holes), toR & D (research
and development), to advertising and other "intangible" costs, and taken
implicitly in a dozen devious ways: by gentleman farmers who build up
 old farms by "losing money" on capital improvements written off as cur-
 rent expenses; by utilities which suffer current losses In new territory to
 nail it down for future exploitation; by oligopolists who incur current
 losses in price wars to secure future market; or underwrite premature
 suburban retail outlets to secure position; by land developers who sell or
 rent the first units at a loss in order to enhance the others; by land specu-
 lators who lose money operating nurseries or farms or drive-ins so they
 can satisfy the IlLS, rule that the land is used in their business, and
 qualify for capital gains; et hoc genus ovine. Further, universal expensing

              depredation funds are seldom provided for the buildings in New York,
 dependence being placed upon the increase in land values to counterbalance the decrease
 in building values through wear and tear." See Robert Hug, "Some Probable Effects of
 the Execption of Improvements front Taxation. • ." [16, 133—34].
192         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

would make general the advantage of deferred tax liability now reserved
for appreciating assets. If, upon realizing income, I can immediately
reinvestitandwriteitalloff,Ihavenotaxtopay,andamaswelloffas                               4
though my original asset had continued to appreciate without being taxed.
  On balance, however we do not recommend expensing as the best way
to tax land rent since the ad valorem property tax on land values is an
available alternative which lacks the faults just listed. Land value is the
sum of future discounted income less costs, with all costs, including capital
costs, dated at the time they are expensed. Levying on the land value
base, therefore, is the counterpart of expensing under the corporate income
tax, with the difference, of course, that the ad valorem approach bases the
tax on assessment of the land's market price or opportunity cost rather than
on records of the present owner's receipts and expenses.
   So far we have considered write-off at maturity, w = m, and expensingi
w 0. There are other possibilities, which we now entertain: a constant
windependentof life, w—k; awalwayskyearsshortof life, w-m—k;
and a w always some fraction of life, w=.
  If w-k the bias to longevity is much greater than if warn, obviously,
because longer life defers tax liability, just as with the simple excise tax
on gross, but does not defer write-off. Maturities less than k are espe-
cially hard hit.
   This might seem a fanciful case, but far from it. We remarked earlier,
in discussing Cary Brown's thesis, that we would question the realism of
assuming w a m in fact. The write-off periods of assets tend to be based
on arbitrary lives specified in I.R.S. Bulletin P or Revenue Procedure 62-21.
Lawyers tend to think in categories, not continua. More durable plant
 ndequipmentofacatgorygivenlsyearsinBullethParemostl&ely
to get 15 years, regardless of actual llfe.'
  Ifwam_lçthebiaswouldbeagainstlongevity. Maturitiesofless
than I would be written off before they were born; and by turning capital
rapidly one could drain the Treasury. This is a fanciful caseD' Not that
no one is allowed to ardn the Treasury, but the privilege is reserved for
investors with long maturities.
   "Breeding cows get 8 years, for example: producing lives may be as high as 15 years.
See Oppenheimer's Cowboy A4Ssetic [24].
   2tUsi these rules: "There was an investor stained Bright
                        Whose money moved faster than light
                        He invested one day
                        In a roundabout way
                        And cashed in on the previous night?
r                  Tar-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II                   193

      If w =     the outcome is somewhere between w - m and w -0. The

    returnaftertaxisshowninequation(7)whereka2.
    (7)            (1 ÷r)m_ (1 +i)a (1 —t)+t(1 -,-ry'-'/2
                  (1-fr)tm [1_t(1+r)/2] = (1+i)tm (1—t)
                                  (li-r)a= (i÷j)m[(1_t)
                                                 [ '(11r)mI2
    Asmgetslarge therightfraction approaches (1-t) as alimitand the
    case resembles earlier cases, Equations (2) and (3), where r—*i as
    m—,. . Formal rigorous proof thatr rises with m follows the lines of
    Appendix 1. Arithmetic illustration follows the lines of Table 1. We
    omit these exercises because they are repetitive variations on a theme.
      An easy near-proof is to take the natural log of both sides of (7).
    (7a) m ' ln(1 + r) —m• ln(1 + 1) + ln(1 — t) — ln[1 —t(1 +r)m15]
    But when r is in the normal range of interest rates:
                        ln(1+r) r,and1n(1+i) i,
    and so:
    (7b)       r= mi-i-ln(1—t) .—ln[1 _t(1+r)/2]
                                         —1+
                                               ln(1—t) _ln[1_t(1+r)M/h]
                                                             in
    The only thing that keeps r below I is the fraction on the right (note that
    it is negative) whose denominator is m. As vs rises, this fraction declines
    in relative weight, and r rises to approach I.
        So even under the write-off assumption most favorable to brevity and
    still levying a tax, the bias is to longevity. There is no escaping it, so
    long as taxation waits on realization. Equation (7b) is generally appli-
    cable to all the point-input point-output cases. Simply replac4by what-
    ever value w has; or if no write-off is allowed strike out the second in in
    the numerator altogether.
       It is easy to tear down. Let us turn now to reconstruction. How might
    we levy an intertemporally neutral tax on the income of capital? We
    begin with some criteria learned above.
      a. Initial costs must be deductibi; to avoid taxing capital turnover.
      b. Unrealized appreciation must be taxed as it accrues, not waiting for
             fle American Journal oj Econondcs and SocioJogy
realization in cash. Thus tax liability is not deferrable by lengthening
maturity.29
  c. Write-off must synchronize with capital recovery; earlier write-off
grants partial or complçte tax exemption.
  The investment value of our immature trees in equilibrium grows at
the rate of interest, I. An income tax as above would take each year the
tax rate times the base V'i. There would be no other tax because at
maturity all appreciation would already have been taxed; and the write-off
of initial cost, C0, would exactly offset the recovery of c.
  The reader's skepticism may rise when he suddenly realizes that our
neutral income tax is very like a property tax on standing timber: it takes
a percentage of the market value each year! Can a tax in such bad odor
actually be a good one?
   The neutrality of the tax is shown as follows:
   r is defined in Equation (8).
(8\/               —it
                         —   i(1+i)t —         —   i(1÷i)m-1t + (1÷i)m
                  1+r        (1+r)2                  (1.J.r)m   (1+r)m
which says that the present value of gross receipts less the present value
of taxes must equal the initial cost of $1. Snmming the geometric pro-
gression and switching the last term to the left side:

 (8a)                        i/1+i\a_itI1 f1÷i\m
                                \1+r/         r—.iL k1+r/
                                     r—i——it
                                     r—i(1--t)
 And this holds true for all m.
   The rationale of the taç and its intertemporal neufrality stand out
 dearly when we consider what the tax would be if we let the amount due
 accrue in a sinldng fund. The present value at time zero of the Inn is
 from (8).
 (Sb)

 But
         r—i
       2tAkernatively, to avoid liquidity problem cases, unpaid accrued taxes might be let
 grow in a sinking fund at interest, to be paid in cash at maturity. But the appreciated
 asset ii always bankable, averting liquidity crises. Of cours the owner must then pay
 interest on the loan, but that is the whole point.
     291t is as though the tree were sold each year, from one investor to another, so else
 whole tiine-consuniing ripening process were "vertically disintegrated." The need for
 that is very clear upon considering one of its incidental benefits, which is to avoid dii-
 crimination between long-haul investors and quick in-and-out investor; and to avoid
 encouraging vertical integration to defer taxes.
               Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, 11                  195

So the value in year    coznpoundingat r, is
                                                                                H
(8c)                     VTms(1+i)m_(1+r)m
That is, if we gave the taxpayer the choke of paying at maturity with
interest, his tax burden would grow exponentially, like money in the badç
at a rate of interest equal to r, maintaining intertemporal neutrality of
cimice by maintaining a constant difference between i and r.
  The remarkable fact emerges that the neutral income tax is like the
property tax on standing timber! Can it be that this pariah of taxes, which
we have scourged out of the system to the cheering of economists, was
actually neutral?
  It is neutral if we assume, as we have, no shifting of the tax, i.e. that
capital bears it wholly in a lower r.
  But that is not a vety realistic assumption; neither is it permissible in a
proof. To assume the absence of shifting of any kind is to assume tax
neutrality, since it is tax-induced reallocation of inputs whose supply is
elastic that causes tax shifting. We cannot prove a tax is neutral by assum-
ing that it is. In Figure 1 we could prove the tax on realized interest
income was not neutral, regardless of shifting to other inputs, because of
intertempora! shifting. We have shown the tax on accrued interest income
is intertemporally neutral if not shifted to other inputs. But now we
must ask what happens to intertemporal neutrality if it is so shifted?
   Suppose a property tax is levied in a jurisdiction too small to infinenre
national or world interest rates at all. Investors need not accept lower
returns there than elsewhere, so capital emigrates until the tax is com-
pletely shifted.
   Now capitals scarcer there and needs to berationed at a higher interest
rate. To ration this reduced supply best a tax system needs to bear equally
on all maturities. That is what the property tax and our neutral income
tax would accomplish. Capital must now earn i (the gross-of-tax rate of
return) in all uses and maturities to return to the taxpayer an after-tax
return, r, that is the same for all uses and maturities.
   Because capital is scarcer, some former uses of it must be abandoned.
The question is, which ones? Under the property tax, capital-intensive
enterprises are hardest hit, as forest owners have always complained. But
that is as it should be: if capitalS scarce, capital intensity is wastefuL
   Capital longevity is of course synonymous with capital-intens4 Long-
lived trees that tie up capital for 80 years or so become submarginal under
196        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

the property tax. The jurisdiction's scarce capital supply is marshaled
into shorter-lived investments.
   The property tax and our accrued-income tax are neutral in this sense:
once the decision is made to tax interest income and accept the consequent
scarcity of capital, then the reduced supply is economically rationed by
requiring all investments to earn i before taxes. The tax is neutral among
all maturities at the higher rate of interest, i, which is now the equilibrium
rate.
   Higher interest rates of course tend to ration out longer maturities, and
the result is to shorten lives. This bears the semblance of a tax bias against
longevity, but that is not & meaningful way to perceive it. It is the tax-
induced capital shortage that causes the bias against longevity. Our tax
then rations capital economically under this new constraint
  Compare, now, the result of a tax on realized income if the tax is
shifted. This bears lighter on longer maturities, and so causes the jurisdic-
tion's scarce capital to be tied up in capital-intensive enterprises—exactly
the wrong allocation to meet a shortage. It spares the investments that
are marginal by virtue of longevity, but hits other& Capital is forced out
of higher uses rather than lower uses.
   There might appear to be some benefit in the realized-income tax basis
to compensate for the bias to longevity in that capital finds a tax shelter
 nlongm iiesandlessof it need be driven to emigrate. But that
would be a false hope to pursue. By avoiding taxes, capital deprives the
Sc of revenue, forcing higher tax rates to yield the same revenue. The
higher rates force out more capital, leaving us finally with less capital and
more intetternporal bias. We cannot take comfort in the hope that tax
avoidance for capital will be imputed into higher tnrble land rents, asin        :1
the expensing case, because the same deferral of realization of income by        14

which capital avoids taxes also defers realization of the associated land
rents and lets land escape as welL In comparing the income tax and the
excise tax we could truly say that the taxpayer benefits of the former over
the latter would be imputed to land and so not escape from the tax base,
because the income tax has less longevity bias than the excise tax. But
now we are comparing the income tax and the property tax. The tax-
payerbenefltsoftheformeroverthelatterarealsoshiftedtoland,butthey                1!J


do escape from the tax base even so because the resulting increase of land
rents is deferred.
   The only reason for preferring the realized basis, therefore, would be
to dissemble: to appease voter clamor for taxes on property income while
ft.


                       Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II                 197

      actually letting it escape. It is easy to imagine and to observe how such
      a device could be and is useful in politics. But it is not the function of
      economic science to supply ruses to mislead voters; it is rather to recom-
      mend the best possible policies in the public interest
        Let us sIIn'm2rize. Our accrued income tax, and the property tax which
      it resembles, are neutral intertemporally if capital absorbs the full tax with-
      out shifting. If capital emigrates to escape the tax the emigration is
      itself a tax-induced misallocation, and the tax is not neutral. Only a tax
      on land, which cannot emigrate can be fully neutral. But if society does
      tax interest income, our accrued-income tax base preserves intvt temporal
      neutrality among investments at that higher rate of time-discount appro-
      priate to the tax-induced scarcity of capital. Thus the accrued-income
      basis is distinctly superior to the realized-income basis of taxation, contain-
      ing an important element of neutrality which the latter lacks, and the
      possibility of complete neutrality under the special and unrealistic assump-
      tion of non-emigration and non-shifting, or under the assumption that the
      property tax base has been modified to exempt improvements.
         Historical opposition to and criticism of the property tax has resulted
      from the tax's rnnldng very visible the destructive effects of tn4ng the
      income of a mobile, migratory input like capitaL That has been especially
      true in forestry. But shifting to the realized-income basis makes the tax
      no less destructive, only less conspicuously so. In the process of conceal-
      ing the damage, however, the income tax adds greatly to it by driving
      capital into longer maturities. It also slougbs the tax burdens of prop-
      erty onto labor, which lacks equally effective means to avoid taxes.

                                       (Continued)
      Resources lot the Future, lit.
      WeslAugIos, A). C. 2OO3                                                      .4



                     Cooperation in Antarctic Research
      Fznr scinmsrs from 12 countries which are signatories to the Antarctic
      Treaty, induding the United States, Britain, Japan, and the Soviet Union,
      met in Tokyo in 1968 for the 14th general meeting of the Scientific Corn-
      mittee on Antarctic Research. The group decided on the establishment of
      an international cooperation system on geological studies, jomt studies on
      logistical problems and creation of a telecommunication bptezn in the
      Antarctice. [From the U S Department of State]
       Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, III
                   By MASON GMFN

                                     in
               Constant Value Assets: the Full Salvage Case
WE BEGAN with the point-input point-output case, thinking it was the
simplest. It turned out to be rather complicated. That was partly be-
cause we took advantage of its simplicity to introduce a number of com-
plications and establish beyond cavil our general thesis of a bias to longev-
ity. That was worth some care, even though only a few real assets
approximate the point-input point-output model, because all other models
may be constructed as summations of point cases, and what is true for each
of the parts is almost surely true for the whole.
  Indeed, with that thought we might almost close here and take the
remainder on faith. But as it happens some of the more complex models
are easier to understand than the point case. Further, it is not iinmedi-
ately obvious from the point case what depreciation schedule would be
neutral, how to judge the bias in schedules commonly used, or how to
judge interclass bias. Also, critics of Austrian capital theory have never
accepted the generality of the tree case. Finally, the more complex models
help us frame some wider generalizations which we would leave with the
reader.
    We next consider an asset whose salvage value at maturity equals its
initial cost; and which yields a steady net income in the years between.
Call it a milk cow, &ssie, foster-mother to man over life, destined for
sausage and shoe-leather on maturity. By assumption she neither appreci-
ates nor depreciates throughout her life. She is much like a time deposit.
The beauty of the Bessie model for tax analysis is the simplicity of de-
fining income in the absence of depreciation and appreciation. The net
 current income is all income. There is no recovery of capital until her
 last day.
     In this case a neutral tax results if the owner pays on current net in-
 come as received; and writes off capital cost in year m when he recovers
 it. Under this rule there is no tax on capital recovery, as with an excise
 tax, to penalize shorter maturities; nor any advance of write-off before
 recovry, as with expensing, to subsidize the investor and counteract the
 tax. The owner cannot avoid full taxation by turning to more long-lived
 Bessies, nor is he penalized if he jilts Bessie for Henrietta Hen, who yields
 a stream of eggs over a short life before broiling. At any life he bears
the full tax, so r=i(l—t).
278       The American Journd of Economics and Sociology

  If we let him defer taxes on milk income until maturity the case would
be like that of the tree with a bias to longevity and a wide-open route
to tax awidance. That is not done explicitly although he can do it indi-
rectly by feeding more milk to calves for future income, and even by
dumping milk in quixotic milk strikes in hope of higher future income.
If we let him write off Bessie before her time he would also pay a lower
effective tax rate (and that we do do, explicitly). As with the tree, ex-
pensing (writing off Bessie's cost as business expenses) would afford full
tax exemption: the yearly interest on write-off at time zero would pay the
yearly tax on income (and the tax rebate on write-off itself would just
cover the tax on realization of salvage value). As with the tree, the bias
to longevity caused by write-off in an intermediate year, sit, would depend
on how w varied with m. In practice it would be biased to longevity be-
cause w tends to vary insufficiently with m. That is equally true whether
w is actually a single year or something like the mean year of a deprecia-
tion schedule taken as the unitary equivalent of the whole schedule.
   An undepreciating asset like Bessie should not be written off over life1
therefore, because to do so in any feasible way creates an intra-class bias.
The only reason for allowing it would be to reduce the inter-class bias in
favor of trees and other appreciating assets. But that is not a good rea-
son either because it would increase the inter-class bias against depredating
assets, the most common kind.
  The Bessie model is of course artificial, rigid, and nnhikely to exist in
pure form. Its value is to highlight basic criteria which we may. seek
to apply to the more difficult case of depreciating aets to help find a
timing of tax liability and write-off that is intertemporally neutral. These
criteria are:
   a. Tax income when it accrues, either as appreciated value (the tree
case) or in cash payments.
   b. Write off assets only when they depreciate (or are liquidated out-
right, which we include with 'depreciate").
   To summarize (a) and (b) tersely: tax cash receipts, deduct cash out-
lays; tax appreciation, deduct depreciation.
   Let us now apply those principles to the more general case of depreciat-
ing assets and find a formula for intertemporal neutrality.

                                     IV
                     Depreciating Assets
ASSETS THAT YIELD regular or intermittent incomes over life may be wa-
lyzed, and usually are, as though they were aggregates of point-input point-
                  Tax-Induced Slow Tumovet of Capital, III                            279

output cases. That is, standard financial formulae for annuities are de-
rived simply by summing up the present value of all the future payments,
thus:
                                         I
                                   V9—Z [a(l+i)]
                                         1
where I is life.
For a constant annuity of Si (beginning at the end of year zero)
                                         i-.(i +i)-3
and all annuity formulae are variations of that.
  We should expect, therefore, that our condus ions from the tree case
should apply to the present more general case, as the Austrians alleged.
Butthatisquiteatrnsfertotakeonfaith,andevenifonedid,thedetails
of the transfer would still pose several perplexities. So we now present
a model of a depreciating asset, the impact of taxation, and the write-off
schedule needed to avoid intertemporal bias.
  Assume our asset costs $1 at time zero and yields a constant cash flow
(net of current costs, of course) over life of / years. It is a depredating
asset not because of falling income but because of falling life expectancy.'°
In equilibrium without taxes the cash flow is the annuity, a, whose present
value is one:


a function tabulated in all interest tables. Sometimes it is called the
"capital recovery" formula, because it returns a dollar of capital with
interest at i per cent.
  Now we levy an excise tax on this annuity. The taxpayer gets a(i -t).
His rate of return after tax, r, is now the capitalization rate that will give
this reduced annuity a present value of one.
                                                        1     1       -'
                                                   —
                                                                  r
Table 2 is a numerical example from the interest tables showing that r
rises with 1.
   Here, as in the point case, excise taxation without deduction of costs
results in extreme bias against short lives, and for the same reason. Any
tax rate higher than 8 per cent makes r negative for maturities of one year
            we said in the introduction, we are treating here only thb case and not the case
of a falling income stream. The latter ii comprehended in the general formula in the
appendix.
280        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

or less. The 50 per cent rate of Table 2 makes r negative for maturities
under 19 years.

                                   TabIe2
        RATE OF RETURN AFTER EXCISE TAX OF so% ON A}NUITY
               WHOSE PRESENT VALUE AT 8% IS ONE (1)
 1          a
                      i                     I              r             r
                  1(1+)1         a(1—t)a-j- •= 1—(1+rY'
  1               1.080                          .5400               —45.
  5               .2505                          .1253               — 14.

 10               .1490                          .0745               —   5.
(19)             ( .1041)                       (.0521)              C0
 20               .1019                          .510                     .2
 30               .0889                           .0444                  2.0
40                .0839                          .0419                   2.8
 50               .0817                          .0409                   3.3

   The case is so obvious from Table 2 that we dispense with graphical
illustration and rigorous proof by differentiation. It is enough to solve
 (9) for r and inspect it:

(9a)
                          r=i(1_.t)ETJ
      Whenl=i,r—i(1—t)—tandrisnegativeforallt> hi. But as!
grows, the fraction in brackets approaches unity and r—*i(i —t).
   The interesting project now is to find a depreciation schedule that may
free the tax of interteinporal bias. The Bessie case leads us to expect this
is possible by writing off capital at the time recovered. The trick in the
annuity case is to separate income from capital recovery.
   The project involves four steps:
   First, modify equation (9) to include the depreciation rebate.
   Second, define true yearly depreciation as the drop in value of an Asset
   Third, substitute the true depreciation into modified equation (9).
   Fourth, show thatr_ifl-t) for all lives, 4 when true depreciation is
allowed.
   Beginning with the first, the taxpayer's r is now redefined to show the
write-off:
                          i                                I
(10)        1—
                                     1 (1+r)4
                              (1 —t)
                  1— (1 ÷i)-'              r              +[i ÷r)11]
The la             the tax rate times the present value of all depreciation
                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, III                           281

write-offs,d,inallyears,w. Theeffectofaddingaterintotheright
side is to raise the value of r, since now the investor can capitalize his
after-tax annuity at a higher rate to snake it equal $1.
   We use r rather than i to discount future d to present values in equa-
tion (10) because the original equation (9) was set up to define that r
necessary to discount after-tax incomes to present values in order to make
the sum equal the initial investment, one. That is what the first term on
the right side of equation (10) does. Write-off rebates are just like
another after-tax income payment at the date received, and discounting by
r treats them parallel to other after-tax income. r is the disctwit rate
that reduces the sum of all future after-tax payments, including write-off
rebate% to $1 [23, 339, Equation (14)—(17)].
  Second, we define true yearly depredation as the drop in value of an
asset. Hereisanetyielthngasteadyanuityofaover/yearsand
then ceasing abruptly. It depreciates not because of declining yearly
income but declining life expectancy.'° We might call it the one-hoss shay
case but that would have only poetic value since new rolling stock tends
in faa to fall rapidly in annual use-value, resulting in the typical ski-slope
depreciation curve traced by Blue Book values of used cars. The present
case is more the slum tenement which with advancing years is sub-divided,
ni*intaining gross income, but accelerating depredation, until one day it is
condemned and dosed, or perhaps denmlished
                                -
                                           due to locational obso-
lescence.51
  The present value of this model slum tenement is the sum of the dis-
counted values of all future incomes:
(11)              V0 = a,(1 + i)' + a2(1 + i).2 ... . . +a1(1       + i)
The passage of year zero does not reduce its value much. It might seem
at first that V0 would fall by the loss of the first term a,(1+i)'t, which
is the largest term. But that is to reckon without the appreciation of all
the later terms which move one year closer to the present. When all the
a values are the same, the end result is to remove the last term, not the first.

    '°Once again, see in. 30.
    "Thanks go to Dr. Herbert Dorau, who has let the writer examine his unpublished
integration of the Straight Line Arcrsal in which he treats building depreciation In much
the nnn,,er that we do here. Earl Bossard has used this method in forecasting the prop-
erty tax base of Shaker Heights [36,43].
    Philip Stern points out that this pattern of building depreciation is Implicit In repay-
ment patterns on mortgage loans in equal monthly installments. LI buildings depreciated
like cars, owners would soon han no equity and lenders would han insufficient collateral
security [33, 112-53]. Frederick Babcock's classical Valuation of Real Estate also tate
depreciation essentially in this manner (chapa 27).
282        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Thus:
                                           r   1   —''i n—'
                                                         / _a(1÷i)1
(12>       d=V0—V1=a(1+i)1—i La
              = a(1 + 1)-i [1 + i] —a (1— (1 + i)'] = a(1       +i)
  As a counterpart and confirmation of this definition of depredation,
note what it implies about the value of income, a —
(13)           Y a — d = a— a(1 + i)—' a[1 —(1 + i)t]
                    But


                      ..Y=V•i.
Income is defined now simply as interest on the remaining value of the
asset, a credible notion in its own right. In early years when value is
high, the cash flow is mostly income, with only a small depreciation write-
off; in later years the cash flow is mostly depredation. This also accords
nicely with the observed fact that older buildings usually pass into high
density use, occupied by lower status tenants who tend to have higher pro-
pensity to wear and tear in using the premises.
   The acute reader will have noted that our definition of income now
leads directly to the conclusion of making the income tax bear on build-
ings in the same time pattern as the property tax: high in early years, low
in later years, taking always a constant share of a base which varies di-
rectly with the capital value. This harmonizes with our conclusion about
the tax on timber, and is subject to the same severe qualification. The
tax on buildings, is a damaging tax. Hardly anyone has a good word for
it, least of all the present writer. But it is visibly damaging precisely
because it does what it is alleged to do, it taxes the possession of capital
and is not avoidable, save by emigration. If the income tax is less dam-
aging it is not because it is a better way to tax property, but a way to let
property avoid taxes and shift more burden to labor. In the process of
avoidance, capital twists and contorts itself into uneconomic time-patterns,
abandoning urgent needs and superior before-tax returns to sequester itself
in an inadequate number of excessively durable buildings.
   Having defined true depreciation, we have completed Step 2 of this
project. That brings us to Step 3, which is substituting true depreciation
into Equation (10). This is a delicate stage of the operation. We must
sum the elements of the present value of depreciation in one simple a-
pression. There are several points where one misstep would ruin the
whole job.
  A touchy matter is to get the end points right.38 Depreciation during
   82credit is due to Professor Samuel Thorndike1 Jr., for raising this point.
   SSTInnb are due to Professor Robert San Souci for repeated emphasis on this as the
key to the mathematics of Cn.n
                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of C4itaI, III                      283

the first year of life is, we have shown, a(1+i)_Z, representing the loss
of the present value of a, (the a due at the end of the last year, 1.) Suc-
ceeding discount powers would fall by one each year, giving exponents
of i—I, 2—i, 3—I, etc. The last term is not, however, raised to the
power 1—1 or 0, but rather—i, or l—1-- 1. Because depreciation during
the last year of life cannot be the full value of a, which by assumption is
receivedattheendoftheyear. Thevalueoftheassetatthebeginning
of the year is a(1 + i)4, and that, obviously, is all there is left to depreciate
during year 1.
  In general, then, for any year n, the depreciation is a(1 + j)fl - -' [23,
341).
  A dose look at year 1 also tells us why we use i rather than r to define
depreciation. Income in year 1 is now a — a(1 + i)1 = a(1 — (1 + 1)-I) =
[a(1 + i)-1)i. That is, income is interest on the value of the asset when
the year began. Now, this income is our tax base. if we used r instead
of i to define it, the tax base would be the after-tax income, an obvious
error."
  It might seem that the market value of the asset at the begnnng of
year 1 would be a(1 + r)-1, making our depreciation schedule arbitrary,
and departing from market values which would be set by discounting at r.
But remember there are two tolls to pay for passage through the year:
after-tax interest, r, and also taxes themselves. To be worth a price r on
January 1, our asset maturing on December 31 must return not just r + rr
butalsorittopaytaxes. But r+it=i, so.ir(1+r+it)=ir(1+i). From
that it follows directly that r=a(1+i)1, where a is a payment due at
year-end.
  The rate the taxpayer uses for discounting future writeoff rebates is,
however, r,as in Equation (10). That is because the rebates are his with-
out additional taxes.
  Now we may find the present value of all write-offs, PVW, for substitu-
tion in Equation (10).

(14)
                    f(1+i)-' (1+i)1t           (1+i)-1
            vWs.aL(l) + (1+r)' ++(1+r)_i
  The brackets enclose a geometric progression whose first term is
(1+i)1                       .
            whose multiplier is ___ , and whose terms number 1.
(1+r)                                1+r
   'We believe that Professor Musgrave falls into this error in his definition of the
"annuity method" [23, 341]. It ii perhaps this which prevented his finding a general
solution.
284         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

                          ri +iI
(14)          PVW(l+i)-.'L1+rJfl÷i)4_(l+r)-i
               a         1+r               1+1            f—i
                                           l+r
Substituting (14a) in (10)
(ba)            1 —a(1—t) (1+r)4 (1+_.d1÷04
                                     1
               Recallthata.
                               1— (1+i)—'
                                        1— (1 + r)4
               1 — (1÷1)—'
                     I
                             =a'    /        r        + (1 +i)—  (1 +r)4
                                                              r.—i
Now to Step 4: does r vary with life, 1?
  Equation (ba) is too formidable to solve directly for r. Fortunately
there is an easier way. We simply test a hypothesis: is the equation satis-
fied if rti(1_t)? A few substitutions and cancellations answer the
question.
(lob)          l_(1+i)4?(l)i_(1÷r)-4÷(1+i)4_(i+r)4
                             i(1—t)       i—it—i
               1— (1 +i)- ? l—(l ÷r)4 (1 +i)-'—. (1 .j-r)4
                     I              i0—0                 i

(lob) istrueforailvalues of 1. Thismeansthattheuseoftruede-
predation as the basis for tax write-off gives us an income tax that is
free of interteniporal bias. The taxpayer's yearly rate of return is re-
duced by the full tax rate, regardless of the life of his investment.
  This completes the fourth and last step of the operation. We have
discovered that the income tax on depreciating asseS may be freed of
intertemporal bias by writing off capital at the time it is recovered. This
reinforces our earlier findings for appreciating assets like trees and full
salvage assets like the Bessie model. By following the simple rules of
taxing appreciation and deducting depredation we not only make the tax
neutral within each class but also among classes, for in all cases the rules
make r=i(1—t).
 The result is of practical interest as a benchmark against which to
judge present write-off formulae. It is even more interesting as a prac-
tical reform proposal in its own right, because it is operational. It is
simply the ad valorem property tax! The basic rules to follow are simple.
It may have appeared complicated to prove that the rules led to unbiased
results, but applying the rules poses no such problem. It is even simpler
                Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, Ill                           285

than following market depreciation downwards, or appreciation upwards.
The practical "operafiona1it' of our system may be better appreciated by
realizing it does not call for a fine appraisal of each year's change in asset
value, an apparent practical barrier that has dampened the ardor of some
theoretical supporters. Rather, it defines income as a percentage of asset
value, so that one capital value is all we need to know, as with the prop-
erty tax, and an assessed approximation is tolerably acceptable. We will
see that this principle holds as well for appreciating land values. Yearly
reassessment is best, but not absolutely essential for a workable system.
The idea is, if we know the market value we know how to allocate cash
flow between income and depredation, not perfectly, but much better than
under any of the arbitrary formulae now in use.
  To criticize our method, as some will, on the grounds that property
appraisal is impracticable, would be merely captious, because all spstdns
of taxing property income require property appraisal at some critical points.
Furthermore, if property appraisal is impractical it is not just taxation but
the free market mechanism that stands condemned, for how else do peo-
ple buy and pledge property?
  We have not as yet produced a completely general proot However,
we will from here on regard the pmposition as proven, for three reasons:
 (1) it is proven for point-input point-output, and all cases are
tions of point cases; (2) we have illustrated the proof in two models
which were summations of point cases; and (3) we provide a completely
general mathematical proof in an appendix.
   Now we are in a position to see clearly some further biases to longevity
inherent in current income tax practice. If an asset yielding a constant
annuity like our slum tenement model were to receive straight line deprecia-
tion, that would be too fast. True depreciation begins low and rises like
a compound interest curve. Figure 2 points up the contrast. Granting
straight line depreciation on the asset writes it off at a faster rate than the
true one and therefore raises r above i(1 — t).
   The resulting bias to longevity inside the subclass of tenement models
(i.e. constant finite annuities) is only moderate. In the appendix we show
how r varies with 1, under straight line depreciation applied to an annuity.
   But the bias is much greater if we compare constant annuities with
assets yielding declining streams of income, like trucks. Their true
    t5Professor Musgrave has worked through an arithmetic example leading toward con-
clusions consistent with ours (23, 340]. HIs treatment is limited, however, to one case of
straight line depreciation. We do not know what his position would be on our allegation
that a neutral income tax is the property tax.
286      -   The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

depreciation is much faster than the tenement model's, even assuming
equal total lives. But here we again run afoul of lawyers who think in
categories and not continua. En tax law, "pigs is pigs"8° and "life is life,"
the number of years between birth and scrapping, so trucks and tene-
merits of the same "life" would be written off at the same rate regardless
of the faster true depreciation of the trucks. This tends to make tene-
ments relatively more attractive after tax than before. Trucks might very
wellendupyieldinganr < i (1—t);andthatwouldobviouslybesoif,
for example, half the value were recovered in one year and write-off took
ten. Tax liability would then precede the mean write-off by five years.
   In general, arbitrary write-off schedules based on "life" favor assets
yielding steady or rising income streams and penalize their opposite nurn-
bets yielding falling income streams. Thus they encourage investors to
build more durability into assets than they would in the absence of taxes;                     H
and they open a wide avenue of tax avoidance.
                                       Figure 2
  True depreciation and straight line depreciaticn for an Meat
             yielding a constant annuity over life



$                                                                   True aepreLatson
                                                                                               (



                                                                    Strc4qht line
                                                                    depreciatica
                                                                L 1_(141).R,
                                                                I
                                                                           Years(n)

    80Por the benefit of younger readers, the allusion is to a tale by Ellis Parker Butler
                                                                                               3
wherein a narrow-gauged freight agent insists On shipping Guinea Pigs at the Swine rate.
    3TM realistically, between birth and statute life, based on broad guidelines depend-
big on the category in which the asset's legal name places it, and only remotely related to
economic life of the particular asset.
    It is not just lawyers who may fall into this error. The Chairman of the President's
Council of Economic Advisors, in L. B. Jc&nson's Administration, in seeking to deny that
capital-intensity implies durability of capital instruments, makes his case with an aan,ple
in which he alleges that three methods of production all involve capital of the same "life"
because the fixed capital lasts for 10 years in each method. But the lives are the same only
in the most superficial sense because diey use different amounts of working capitaL
G. Ackley, Macroeconomic Theory [1,467-69].
                 Tax4nduced Slow Turnover of Capital, III                               281

   In fact, the tax laws have moved towards tax exemption for durable
capital by accelerated depreciation, capital gains treatment, declining ba!-
ance depreciation, sum of the years' digits, the investment tax credit,
expensing of some durable investments, implicit expensing through alloca-
ting owned resources to building durable capital, (extra-legal) use of cx-
pensable hired resources to build durable capital, super-accelerated write-
off for buildings placed on leased land, etc. In the abstract, these devices
could benefit short maturities as much as long. In practice they usually
benefit the long. First, they are mostly reserved for assets more long-
lived than specified minimum lives;8 second, they tend to make write-off
schedules more and more independent of actual lives and time-patterns of
income streams.
  In addition, as everyone knows and most economists deplore, use of
the realized-cash definition of income exempts altogether the implicit
income from owner-occupied residences and other consumer capital. This
creates in the income tax an additional bias to longevity. Of course short-
lived consumer capital benefits as much as long from this exemption.
The bias to longevity comes because the individual piling up tax-exempt
consumer capital has to reduce its turnover rate to avoid increasing his rate
of real consumption. Also, he now discounts future implicit income at
the lower after-tax rate of return, r, which favors longer lived investments.
   These various practices are not without short run macrn-economic bene-
fits. They raise the marginal efficiency of capital and encourage net new
investment. They let capital avoid taxation at home and prevent its flight
overseas. But they do so at a fearful price. They shift the burden of
taxes from property to labor (land escaping also by various ruses we have
mentioned and others yet to be shown). They misallocate capital into
more long-lived forms than would best meet consumer demands. And
they retard replacement in all future years, lowering gross investment in
any year and thus lowering the sum of income-creating expenditures and
the demand for labor.
                              (Continued)
Resources /or the Future, inc.
Washington, D.C. 20036
    38For example, Congress in 1962 plugged a loophole by denying to personal property
the privilege of capital gains treatment on the excess of sale value over book value resulting
from excessive depreciation—but let real estate retain the privilege [33, 153]. Recapture
of excess sale values is at a sliding scale of rates that declines with the period of time
a building is held [33, 155—56]. The idea seems to be that long term investors are 'legit-
imate," while others are "fast-buck artists." We think that the fast buck is socially
superior to the slow one.
    Congress' special partiality for real estate investors shows up again in the 1960 law
letting Real Estate Investment Trusts deduct their Ihilenis (sic) from taxable income.
       -     -—       —,_•-—--_.-.__•_n_...-. rfl...   .c.r— rr..-rr-r.   _______   -
                                                                                        ...•




        Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV
                              By MA.soN GAFFNEY

                                             V
                                           Land
WE HAVE ANALYZED three classes of durable capital assets: appreciating,
full salvage, and depredating. Finally we come to the fourth and last,
land. Land differs so much from the first three that many economists
regard it as a dass ml generis, and so do we, but the reader may prefer his
own taxonomy and still note with us that land yields income in perpetuity;
land purchase is not income-creating, macro-economically speaking; land
never turns over in the Austrian sense of production and liquidation; land
is immobile among taxing jurisdictions; land i5 periodically salvaged by
demolition of old buildings and renewed with new ones; land grades off
from the best down to a marginal supply which is virtually free.
   Land has long been regarded as a peculiarly promising tax base because
it cannot emigrate from a jurisdiction, nor be used up, nor otherwise flee
from taxes. Marginal land is not sterilized by taxes on land rent or land
value, because marginal land has neither (a point known to fame since
Ricardo's Principles, Chap. X, "Taxes on Rents" [26]). So if an inter-
temporally neutral tax should fall on land rent the tax would not be shifted,
but would remain neutral. It would never, like a tax on capital, lower
the marginal efficiency of capital. To what extent does our present tax
system take advantage of these opportunities?
  Beginning with the excise tax, it favors land enormously because land
never turns over. Only the net income of land could be subject to a retail
sales tax. In practice, even that is often exempt. Whoever heard of an
excise tax on ground rents from long term leases, for example, or on slum
rentals, or on landlords' crop shares, or on implicit income from owner-
occupied residences, or on parking fees? Excise taxes are a landowner's
best friend. The doctrine that a general retail sales tax such as exists in
many states is approximately neutral in its effects on sellers by virtue of its
general application should be thoroughly discredited.
   The income tax is quite another matter. Costs are deductible, so there
is no tax on turnover, and no inherent bias in favor of land. On the con-
trary, the various devices for advancing write-off of depreciable or recov-
erable capital before capital recovery, although they do bias investors to
longevity, should not bias them toward land, the most long-lived of assets,
because land is not supposed to be written off at all. Rather, they tend
410         The Amerkan Journal of Economics and Sociology
                                                                                            I
by partially exempting capital from taxes to throw more burden onto land.                   4
  A simple tax on the net income of land would, so long as the land is
unappreciating, lower income by the full tax rate, just as with Bessie's
milk; and that would seem to be the end of it.
   But it is hardly the bginning. In fact, land escapes the full impact
of the tax rate in several ways: by being written off in disregard of law;
by appreciating; by yielding deferred periodic incomes; by capturing the
value of land development investments; and by submitting to capture under
the rule of prescription. We will treat these in order.
   Taxpayers have not found it very difficult to write off land purchases.
Would that the I.R.S. offered as little resistance to the efforts of profes-
sional men to write off training costs. It is only necessary that one buy
land under an old building. Then he allocates most of the purchase price
to the depreciable building, and writes it off as depreciation—never mind
how many times it has been written off before.° Thus land which the
law says is not depredable at all, may be written off not just once, but sev-
eral times!
   Were it not for this device the income tax would serve as an effective
stimulus to urban renewal. Once the cost of an old building was corn-
pletely written off the current operating income would be fully tanhle.
The law would recognize it for what it is, pure ground rent, and recognize
the building for what it is, art empty shell, a shade enduring a life-after-
death. Thus in the year after the last write-off the slum owner would
suddenly face a much higher tax bill, which he could then mitigate by
giving consumers what they want, a new building, and writing off its cost.
  But under present practice the surest way to lose the privilege of writing
oilthecostoflandistodearitanderectanewbuilding. Forthenthe
I.R.S., seeing through a glass darkly, finally perceives that what you
bought really was not the old building but the land beneath it—and denies
write-off. (After all, someone has to pay taxes to finance those Urban
Renewal subsidies!) The net effect is this: you can depreciate land so
long as you do not improve it.
  The fact that land can be written off, even if only once, casts an entirely
different light on the question of tax bias. To write off something which
lasts forever is to receive from the Treasury a large share of the cost of an
asset which continues to yield its income to you in perpetuity After the
last write.off the Treasury gets only a return on its investment The land-

   80ff challenged, he can refer to the local assessor's allocation, which almost always
understates the land component, partly no doubt to accommodate local people in their
dealings with I.R.S., which accepts the local assessor's breakdown as concluain evidence.   .1


                                                                                            I
                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capita!, IV                            411

owner's equity is reduced by the full amount of the rebate, and on that
reduced investment he receives an income 100 per cent tax-free. From
the moment of fuli write-off, the land purchase has been handled as if it
were a current expense,'° like a disposable paper towel.
   It has been suggested in the past that the fiscal authority should buy from
landowners the right to tax them, i.e. it should compensate landowners
before raising their taxes. By letting them write off land, that is exactly
what it has done. Only the operation has been quiet and unacknowledged,
and has not been matched by equal generosity to salaried men, 'who pay
taxes for the original sin of being born, the curse of Adam, the privilege of
giving involuntary military service, and the folly of voting for men who
show them their interest in their ruin and their ruin in their interest How
the ancient gods must be laughing!
   Not all land is written off, to be sure. It has to be income property;
it has to be bought for a good price and under an old building. Owner-
occupied residential land and the houses on it are exempt, as everyone
knows, because implicit income is tax-free. Fringe land, we will show,
is largely exempt because of appreciation. But there is another large class
of land that achieves its exemption by write-off: minerals. I have treated
this case elsewhere [14; see Editorial Conclusions]. Suffice it here that
the depletion allowance lets the investor recover, tax free, not only his
discovery and development costs (which have already achieved tax exemp-
tion by being written off as expenses), but the value of the mineral rights
before discovery, a pure rent, a value that grew up from nothing and on
which no income tax was ever levied.
   A second way that land receives a lower effective tax rate is through
appreciation. If the land is held idle while appreciating, the case is like
that of the tree. In an informed market the market value grows at com-
pound interest, so that each year's gain is automatically plowed back into
the base and earns interest in the following years. But this income is not
taxed year by year as it is constuctively received and goes to work earning
more income. The tax is deferred until sale, at which time the rate is one-
half or less that on ordinary income.
   It is sometimes alleged that land and common stock price increments
are not income because they are the price of future income; and that to
tax them as well as the future ordinary income they yield is double taxation.
   If he sells, the landowner is taxed on the gain, seemingly limhing the time of the
exemption. But he need never sell; and if he does the tax is deferred, and at capital-gains
rates. Remember, too, that most of the write-off is taken well before the year of fail
write-off. Remember, £nafly, that the new owner may, and does, repeat the process, until
the time of demolition and renewaL
412       The American font-nd of Economics and Sociology

Fortunately this is not a great issue—the law does recognize such gains as
income. Anyone denying that the increment is truly income must be hard
put to explain why the investor has kept his money tied up in idle land
for 20 years. But the fayored treatment capital gains receive may reflect
some residual influence of the double taxation notion, so let us refute it.
  Land prices rise because the passage of time brings higher future in-
comes closer to the present. This is a benefit above and beyond the
incomes themselves. Value rises from the approach of higher future
incomes, without any of them having necessarily been received. It is true
that part of the future incomes will be taken by taxes; but land prices stem
from the income after taxes, and price increments arise from the temporal
approach of these higher after-tax incomes.
   Putting it another way, suppose that after 20 years the original owner
sold his appreciated land, and invested the gain in an earning asset.
The land yields an income for the new owner; the new asset yields another
income to the original owner. But now there are two incomes where there
was one before. Or suppose the original owner spends the gain on
consumption. He has consumed his entire income—yet the new owner
continues to receive income, unabated, and the old owner has not drawn
down his original capital but just consumed from income.
  Appreciation is income for the same reason that depreciation is deduct-
ible from income. True depreciation is the present value of a loss
or deferral of future income; appreciation is the present value of a gain.
or advance of future income. Indeed, referring back to Equation (12) it
is evident that true depreciation is net of the unrealized appreciation of
the unexhausted parts of an asset. So true depreciation already entails
the concept of taxing unrealized appreciation. Annual taxation of un-
realized appreciation is consistent with our definition of true depreciation,
and not to tax the former would be inconsistent and unbalanced and would
result in a distorted tax system.
  ,So land appreciation is income, just like tree appreciation, and a neutral
tax would take it as it accrues each year. The present system of deferred
taxation grants it a lower effective rate, thus making purchase of land with
appreciation potential relatively more attractive than it would be in the
absence of taxes.
  Another way of perceiving the point, one which would apply as well to
the tree case, is to think of tax deferment on unrealized appreciation as
tantamount to plowing back income into the land investment and auto-
matically allowing it to be written off as expenses, deferring the tax until
later. Thus the principle of taxing realized rather than accrued income is
                                                                                             ______________
                                                                                                -J




                 Tax4nduced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV                             413

the same as granting the expensing privilege to each year's added incre-
mental investment in the land value.
 The privileged nature of this treatment may be appreciated by compar-
ing the tax treatment of an E bond held in one's safe-deposit box. The
law is explicit: declare and pay tax on the yearly interest, even though
you never touch it and indeed cannot do so without penalty. Or consider
the treatment of contributions to some pension funds. These are involun-
tary; withheld from wages; non-transferable; forfeitable; non-bankable---
but fully taxable in the year withheld.41 Or compare the ELC.A. payroll
tax. Employees pay income tax on gross salary before the F.I.C.A. deduc-
tion, even though benefits are deferred to age 65—for those who survive.
   Appreciating land enjoys further advantages due to its permanence.
Comparing land with trees, land gets the better tax break because trees
have to be cut and sold when ripe. Not so with land: it need never be
sold, and if the owner has bought it for "expansion" in the future, he
will have achieved a tax-free income when his need arrives. (He gets
free something he would have paid for.) If the owner can hold on until
death do the land and him part, his heir begins again with the higher basis,
the tax being forgiven forever [311. If he sells his "residence"—or a
large lot around his house which a complaisant I.R.S. accepts as such—he
can defer the tax by reinvesting in another residence within one year of
sale. If his land is condemned he can do the same. if he is 65 or over
hemaybeabletoavoidthetaxunderanewlaw. Or if thelandisa
"farm" he can barter it, tax-free, for a larger "like property" further out
of town, letting the new owner with a higher basis subdivide the appre-
ciated one." Or he can donate appreciated land to charity or education,
writing off the appraised value without ever having paid a tax on the
appreciation, and enjoy use of the land until death. All the local taxes and
interest that he may pay during his wait are expensable even though they
are properly viewed as part of the long-term investment itself and should

   '1Latn growth of the fund at interest is not usually taxable until later, softening the
contrast in treatment. Some pension fund contributions are not taxable even initially..
There is great individual variation, much of it capricious. Contributions to the Wisconsin
State Employees Betirement Fund, for one example, are taxable although not received.
   '2Section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code provides: 'No gain or loss shall be
recognized if property held for productive use in trade or business or for investment (not
including stock, etc.) is exchanged solely for property of a like kind to be held either
for productive use in trade or business or for investment."
   There is a good deal of "tailoring" of transactions to fit the letter. A prospective
buyer of a suburban farm for cash may instead buy a rural farm (satisfactory to the
prospective seller) and then swap farms with him. The rural land of like kind" Sght
also be a golf course, airport, cemetery, quarry, dump, etc. A network of brokers' clubs
has developed to arrange such bartering.
414          The American Journd of Economics and Sociology

be capitalized [8].       If he loses on a sale he can deduct the loss from
ordinary income, often selecting the year of loss realization for his greatest
convenience, lie can sell on the installment plan and pay taxes only as
the installments come in. He can sell on a contingent price basis and
count all payments as non-taxable capital recovery until he has recovered
his full basis, and only then start paying taxes—another long deferral of
liability.If overall losses pile up, he can delay realization until after
merger with a proñt-making business. If the landowner is a church,
school, charitable or fraternal or cemetery organization, its — may be
exempt even though the same organizations would be taxed if they made
money by rendering services. It is no straight narrow path that leads
down to exemption, but a royal road, toll-free, posted and blazed all the
way, with dergymen and educators for respectable companionship.43
  A neutral income tax on increments to land value would take as its base
the annual appreciation. In equilibrium the appreciation will just covet
interest on the value at the beginning of the year (assuming, for simplicity,
noothertaxesorothercarryingtosts). Here,justasinthetreecase,the
neutral income tax base transforms the income tax into the property tax.
IfSsitevalueinanyyear,theneutralincometaxbaseisS3.i. The
property tax base is S. In this case i is not lowered by the tax—land
supply being lixed, the tax is entirely absorbed by land in lower values of
S0, following the traditional theory of land tax capitalization worked out
by Jensen [19]. TM anticipation lowers S0—the early value base from
which appreciation begins—by whatever amount may be necessary to let
the holder earn 1 per cent while he holds it idle for appreciation.
   A long-standing criticism of the property tax applied to suburban land
that is rising in value is that use of capital value rather than current annual
value as the base results in overtaxation of the land. The implicit assump-
tion is that appreciation is not income and should be tax-free. The reason
land sells for more than capitalized current income is the expectation of
higher future income. This is not a static condition, but a journey between
equilibria." Each year the higher future moves doser to the present, a
blessing signalized by the value's rising at i per cent. That is an income.
Once that be accepted, and the bias of deferred taxation be accepted, then
itfoliows thatthecapitalvaluebaseis awayto taxthis income, audmore-

    On these matters the writer has received valuable insig%ts from John Denton, Doug-
las Kilbourn, Daniel K. Dixon, and Ben Muss, to .11 of whom he offers sincere thank
An excellent treatment I. found in William Scolield's "Value and Competition for Land"
(27].
    "This helps explain the profusion's dilliculcy In coming to grips with the question.
'e ban all been nursed on statics.
                                                                                               I
                 Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV                             415

over the best way, a neutral way. It may be done by use of either the
property tax or the income In.
  In the analogous tree case we had to qualify our conclusions drastically
on considering shifting. Here the analogy ceases, for there is no shifting
of the land tax. It does not lower the rate of return in the first place, but
rather the cost of buying the asset on which the return is reckoned. The
asset being fixed in supply, that ends the chain of reaction." There is no
destruction of marginal supply, because the tax on marginal land is zero.
There is no flight of tax base by emigration, by retarded turnover, or dis-
saving.
  These matters may be clarified by constructing a model of land which
appreciates and at the same time yields ordinary income. We call it the
"Perpetual Appreciation" or PA model.
  Suppose a (piece of) land yields a yearly income above current costs
thatgrowsbygpercenteachyear.'° Lettheincomeattheendofthe
initial year be 1. The site value, S0, is the sum of the progression:

(15)                                                                    (g<i)
                        1+i          1+g 1+i—1—g 1—8
                                      14-i
  From (15) it follows that
(ISa)        S0i—1+S.g
That means that Si> 1. i is the yearly cash income. Therefore the
income is too little to cover carrying costs and to warrant anyone's hold-
ing the land, with or without taxes. Shall we then conclude that no one
can afford to own this land at the alleged price
   How can anyonebehave economically in this rising land market and add
enough land to his holdings to equate marginal net yields with marginal
carrying costs? Very simple: he counts the yearly increment as income
in the year it accrues in the form of higher land priceP Anyone denying
this must also deny that the land market works economically. The yearly
deficit he must cover is S0i —1, which from (iSa) equals S0g. But S,g is

    '50r it would, if truth were altogether that simple. Ye still must consider die prac-
tical effect of lower land prices on the production of 'Vickseli's "rent-goods," or land dc-
velopnient investments. Ye table that question for a few paragraphs. For the present,
consider these investments to be skilfully deducted by die assessor in measuring the land
value tax base which rises because of the approach of die city and publicly £nanced works
exogenous to the owner.
    4'For a thorough discussion of this case see Leon VeIns [40].
     41The writer is indebted to Mr. Nicolaus 'fideman for introducing this concept.
416        The American Journd o/ Economics and Sociology

exactly the yearly appreciation of S0:

(16)            S1—S0
   Therefore the cost of carrying land each year at the-price-S is just cov-
ered by the sum of net caAh income plus current appreciation. Thus, if
traditional valuation theory is correct, investors put a value on appreciating
land which treats current appreciation as current income. Why, then,
should an income tax on it be deferred? No reason in the world unless
we intend, as a matter of deliberate public policy, to give partial tax exemp-
tion to landowners. For that is just what the present policy does when
it defers taxation of capital gains until time of cash sale.
    In this case, as in all previous cases analyzed, an intertemporally neutral
tax is one that taxes a constant percentage of current income, and current
income is a constant percentage of capital value.
    We emphasize that the PA model dears away an alleged practical diffi-
culty of induding asset accretion in current income. Henry Simons, Wil-
liam Vickrey, and Irving Fisher all saw the intertémporal neutrality of the
accrued basis. They hesitated before the practical problem of appraising
property each year to tax the increment. The 1961 Joint Economic Com-
mittee added a jaundiced caveat [43, 69], as did Lawrence Seltzer [28, 40].
    What we have just shown, however, is that the property tax that takes
a percentage of capital value aulomatically taxes increments. No further
increment tax is needed. So what we propose is not an innovation with no
practical possibilities, but a strengthening and extension of the property
tax on capital value, which we have always had. Be it further noted that
it is quite inconsistent to claim that alleged practical difficulties prevent
annual tax recognition of positive appredation in a system that has devised
several ways to allow negative appreciation annually.
  A third general way for landowners to receive a lower tax rate is to
select time patterns of land use that sacrifice smaller early rents for larger
late rents. This is a form of investment, on the whole a legitimate one.
Like all investments, these may enjoy some tax abatement by deferral of
realization. The cost is the early foregone rent, the payout is the later
premium rent Not all land offers opportunity for this maneuver. There
must be some intertemporal interdependence of rents. Examples are:
starting new orchards (which require 5—10 barren early land-years as an
input); forestry, deferral of mineral extraction (the L. C. Gray example
with which we opened our Introduction); deferring site renewal in transi-
tional land-use areas awaiting greater "ripeness" or certainty."
   '°Another example is writing long term ground leases wherein early rents are low
                                                                   I                         ____


                 Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV                           417

   The cost is not explicit, but is still as good as expensable since no tax
is due on the foregone rent that would otherwise have been taxable cash
income. That is, the effect is the same as though the early rent were re-
ceived in cash and then reinvested and expensed. A good term for this
is "implicit expensing." It is not reserved to landowners. The student
who foregoes present income to devote his time to an education for en-
hanced future income is implicitly expensing the investment of his time
as well. But land is a convenient vehicle for a great deal of this kind of
thing, more so than other assets, because of its infinite life. Expensing,
as we have seen, is tantamount to complete tax exemption. That is not
to say that the entire land rent achieves exemption, but the gain from
deferral does.
   Inthiscasethatisnotnecessarilyabadthing. Itmeansthatataxon
land income, taken by itself, is intertemporally neutral.
   Let us take a point-input point-output case on good land, where the
investment has to grow fast enough to yield a rent (or a market return on
the site value) as well as interest on the initial non-land costs, There
is a periodic surplus of gross income over compounded C0, which surplus
wecalitheperiodicrent,A. mistheyearof maturity, andAisthe
periodic equivalent of a, the annuity rent. Am and a are related by a stan-
dard tabulated financial formula:

(17)
At the interest rate i the investor is indifferent between the yearly rent and
a periodic rent, Am.
   Intheabsenceofanydisturbancetoi,ataxonA.isequivalenttoatax
on a, and leaves the indifference unchanged. That is:

(17a)                 a(1—t) eAm(1t) (1+i)a_1
reduces to (17) because the factor (1- t) cancels. The tax on rent does
not itself disturb i, and so long as nothing else does either, the tax is neu-
tral. The reason the tax does not change i is that it is fully absorbed into

and later ones high. Thismightscemtobeoffsetbyanequalandoppositetaxdisad-
vantage to die lessee, but on the other hand it is a means of extending him credit at a
time when be needs a lot and it reduces his cost deduction during early years of high
write-off, so it often suits nicely to mxmfre blat (after-tn) beneSts of lessor and
lea One also has the option of selling for capital — just before the higher rent
takes effect.
    Another device is to allow lower rent in consideration for the lessen leaving a good
building at lease-end, which the fe-holder acquires tax free (taxable as a capital gain if
he should ever sell) (H, 1N6—fl].
418        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

lower site values, S. One continues to earn a market return on the re-
duced base. There is no loss of marginal production, and hence no shift-
iag, because on marginal land the tax base is zero.
  Why is the taxpayer indifferent between an earlier and a later tax in
this case? Because the dater tax is higher. Am, the later tax base, is
            in
greater than Za21, the earlier tax base. (17) is derived by compounding
              1
                                        in
eacha forward to year m, so AmnIa,i(1+i)m. The excess of Am
                                        1
      in
over Xa0 is compound interest On the earlier payments foregone. Am is a
     1
sinking fund which grows each year by the current payment plus interest
on accrued payments. So the tax liability deferred each year grows at com-
pound interest, and the taxpayer does not abate the tax by deferring rnlin.
tion.
   It might seem now that the tax on deferred land income is also a tax on
the interest earned by deferral of use. But it definitely is not so, and it is
important to understand why not, both to clarify the present point and for
all analysis of the fascinating relationships of rent and interest So far in
this paper we have skirted the second matter, which is, however, central
to any analysis of tax shifting.
   Consider one year's rent, a1, due at the end of year zero. Suppose the
landowner defers it. He is plowing it back into his land-use plan. At the
end of yearmberealizesitatcompound interest,anditisworth a (1+i)".
  The tax on it, T, also grows at compound interest. Had it been taxed
at the end of year zero, T1 — t'a2; being taxed at the end of year m, Tm —
ta1 (1 +i)m, so TmttTi (1 +i).
  But if we were taxing interest, Tm would have to be greater than
T2 (l+i)m,tocutintoi. WhenTeTj(ii)mwearelettingtheIand
owner earn the gross-of-tax rate return on his investment in deferral of
land rent We just aren't letting him earn any more than that. But we
are not taxing interest.
  This explains the L. C. Gray example of minerals conservation with
which we opened our Introduction. The miner who defers extraction is
foregoing, and thereby investing, current rent to gain enhanced future
rent. A tax on the pure rent income is intertemporally neutral because
the after-tax rent grows over time at the same percentage as the full rent"
   "For modem treatmenti of Gray's principle s Orris Herfindahl, "Depletion and
Economic Theory" (17]; and William Vickrey, 'ECOnOIIIIC Criteria for Optimum Rita
                                               .1                     ••__



                Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV                       419

  So the part of the income tax that falls on land rent is intertemporally
neutral. But let there be a tax on interest, so r < i, and there is a pre-
mium on deferring realization of land rents, just as there is on other de-
ferrals of tax liability. Any deferral that yields at the rate i now yields the
investor more than r, the after-tax yield on alternative investments. So
landowners alter their use plans toward the ftbre until they reach a new
equilibrium.
  Referring back to equation (17) since a Am           ___
                                                        (1 + i)m —1
                                                                        then



a<Am(l)ml. It now requires a higher annuity, a', to be as at-
tractive to taxpayers as A,, and lower and later deferred rents that were
submarginal now become interesting for landowners.
   A good way to perceive this, a way that is equivalent to the use of
calculus, is to think of how to maximize a when Am is a positive function
ofm. areachesitsmaximumintheyearwhenthepercentageincreaseof
numerator and denominator in (17) are equal, which could be phrased
"when the elasticity of the ratio equals one." The percentage increase of
the denominator is positively related to i or r, whichever is used; and for
large values of rn becomes virtually equal to i or r. The year when unit
elasticity is reached wing i, the elasticity using r is still greater than one, be-
cause r < i. So at the after-tax rate, r, the taxpayer maximizes a by
choosing longer cycles. In general, all later rents gain lustre relative to
earlier ones, so all land-use plans are re-timed towards the future.
  The lowering of r below i lightens the tax burden on the landowner
who defers rent in three ways:
   Amconvertstoahigherannuityatrthanati. (Amremainsthesame
by the assumption of no tax shifting.)
— the annuity value rises as Am is deferred to (m + x) in response to the
lower rate of return.
— the annuity is capitalized into land value at r instead of i. Since
r=i(1—t), and the annuity falls by less than the factor (1—t) due to
deferral of Am to (m + x), the capital value of land will actually rise—a
little capital gain on top of everything else!
   But what if the tax on capital is shifted, so that raib (recall that b
the base rate of return in the absence of taxes)? In general the shifting
will be to land, if the tax jurisdiction is small, because then wage rates,

of Depletion" (39]. Both appear in Mason Gaffney (editor) Extractive Resources eisd
Taxation (14]. The editor in his Conclusion then seeks to expand the principle to ac-
count for durable investments in mining improvements.
                                                                                                     )




420        The American lourn4 o/ Economics and Sociology

interest rates, material costs, and product prices are parameters exogenously
set, and land may be treated as the residual claimant in the simple old
manner of classical theory. Then the value A, the periodic land rent,
becomes smaller by the anount necessary to absorb the tax; and site value,
5, drops in the sante propdrtion.
   But this drop in land rent tends to retard the maturity of investments
on the land. Timbei, for example, is finandally mature when its yearly
growth increment, g', is no longer enough to cover interest on the sum of                     I. -

its salvage or stumpage value, g, plus the site value, S. If site value is                    4-
lower, and all other parameters remain the same, harvest comes later.5°
As a secondary effect, this will somewhat abate the drop of site value, re-
flecting the value of tax avoidance.
   The essence of the matter may be grasped from the equation relating                        -1
rate of return to site value. If we require a tree to yield a return on the
land it uses, as well as the depreciable costs, the return is defined by equa-
tion (18).
(18)
                          (1+i)m_1
  After a tax, fully shifted to S:
(19)                      (1+i)m_+m0)
It requires a lower value of S to satisfy (19) than (18), so the marginal
rowth of R., that was just enough to pay the carrying costs on R, and S
is now superabundant, and enough to carry the tree a few years longer.
                                                                                              1
   Another, but equivalent, approach is to solve for S and maximize it:

  9aj                     s Rm_t(Rmc)_c(1+i)m
                                          (1 ÷i)m_1
Deducting taxes from the numerator increases its percentage growth rate
and defers the date of m at which s is maximized.
  So a tax on interest income, whether or not shifted, tends to favor time-
patterns of land use that emphasize future over present realization of tax-
able rent income. The present paper only scratches the surface of the
relationships between interest income and rent. We regard this as of
first priority for extended treatment in a sequel. But to hold the present
paper within bounds, we dose the matter here.
   A fourth way that land achieves tax exemption is by its dose associa-
tion with the production of Wicksell's "rent-goods," perdurable invest-
   ° This is based on the Faustmann formula of classical forestry economics. For an       -   -:
extended treatment of this point sa M. Gaffney, Cencefrts of Fiwicid Maturity of Timber
(13].




                                                                                              4
                                                                                               1
———,— ——                             -    —. ..——.       ..   . ...   .     -   .. '.—        .   -_,   ——. —.— p..—.




                          Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, IV                   421

       nients in laud development which take on some of the character of land
       itself, and whose life span is so long that for most practical purposes they
       may be treated as permanent These include cuts and fills, some kinds of
       grading draining, damming, etc. Professor Martin Bailey has taken fills
       in shallow water to represent the genus, and we borrow his example [2].
          To begin, these investments produce land substitutes. Anything that
       raises the price of land tends to divert investment into land substitutes.
       The first three biases above tend to raise land prices and thus to stimulate
           the production of these land substitutes.
              Any permanent fill whose cost may be written off, however slowly, finally
           achieves complete exemption from income tax, following the reasoning
           already expounded. Thus the after-tax yearly rate of return, r, for fill-type
           investments is made higher than for shorter ones yielding the same pretax
           rate of return, i. "Grading' is part of the land investment and non-de-
           preciable, but many other investments of this type may be written off quite
           legally. Those that are not depreciated are prorated among the lots and
           written off as lots are sold—a sort of depletion allowance for land devel-
           opers—so that land development firms often snake their taxable profit
           entirely on the last few lots sold, deferring taxes to the very end of the sales
           operation. This kind of tax advantage is hard to come by in enterprises
           that produce in an endless stream.
              But all that is disequilibrating and leads to shifting. The premium
           on fill returns draws investors into fills until the v's are equalized on all
           investments. The beneficiary of shifting is then the owner of land under
           shallow water. The price of such land, whose supply is limited and in-
           elastic, rises to absorb the premium on fill returns.
              Some of the premium might conceivably be shifted forward to land
           users in lower rents and sale prices. However, filled land is not a dif-
           ferentiated commodity but a perfect substitute for naturally city land, so
           the shifting forward, if any, is trifling compared to the shifting backward
            (in this case "downward!") to the owners of sites under shallow water,
           which are scarce and differentiated. The capital frozen in fill-type invest-
           ments is permanently preempted from alternative uses on superior land,
            some of which land is thus withdrawn from use. The net result prob-
           ably is to reduce the effective land supply.
             Sometimes the "fill" is financed not by landowners as individuals but
           by landowners collectively, organized in that syndicate of landowners
           known as municipal government. Now we are speaking of "public"
           works. This subsidy takes the form of the exemption of municipal bonds
           from federal income tax, so landowners can sell them for a better price and
422         The Amnkan Journal of Economics and Sociology

plan more long-lived investments, coupled with the deductibility of local
taxes by which landowners pay off these bonds—a double subsidy when
one considers that bond service indudes repayment of principal faster than
the works depreciate.5t If the works are federal, there are no increased
local taxes at all, and the longevity of investments is calculated at interest
rates far below the market, sometimes zero. This advantage goes into
enhancing land values.
  This gives us an insight into shifting that applies over the whole range
of topics we have covered. The specific beneficiary of the premium on
longevity is the owner of those lands which are better suited to long in-
vestments. The specific sufferer is the owner of land on which short
investments are better. That is as far as partial analysis can take us. The
wider effects are those of retarding the turnover and replacement of a
nation's capital, which shifts the whole burden from property to labor,
following WickseWs analysis. To Wicksell we add that slowing replace-
ment also means piling up limited capital on fewer sites which are cleared
and renewed less often, enhancing the bargaining position of land relative
to labor. The ultimate victim is in general labor.
   A fifth means by which land benefits from tax bias is through that per-
vading institution, the rule of prescription. Submarginal land, whose
tenure is often uncertain, is subject to capture by virtue of occupancy and
use. No one would use submarginal land, ideally. But people will use
it if both (a) they expect it to become rentable in the future, and (b)
present use establishes future ownership. The appropriative doctrine of
water law in the 17 Western states is a splendid example of the rule of
prescription.
   The result is to cause investors to develop and use resources while they
are still submarginal. They suffer early losses, many of them in the guise
of expensable current cos% in order to establish their history of use. The
payoff on this investment is the effective ownership of the resource in the
future, when it will bear rent.
   Our income tax system, with its bias to longevity puts a special premium
on this kind of land acquisition. The 'purchase price" of land—the early

    BI Who else gets to deduct repayment of principal at all?
    520n might think that these subsidies to land development would in the aggregate
result in more land development, eventuating in an artificial abundance of land, shifting
the tax burden to landowners in lower rents. But that would be to assume a limitless
supply of capital. In fact, the more capital we sink into developing submarginal land, the
less remains to improve and fructify naturally superior land, and to complement labor in
enterprises where capital cycles faster. In a nutshell, capital complements labor by turning
over, which requires labor, and complements land by standing still, which requires land,
so slow turnover favors land over labor. Cf.      footnotes 5, 20.
                Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, 1V                423

losses—is fully deductible, much of it immediately as current expense.
The payoff—the ownership of title to the appreciated resource—is not tax-
able at all unless or until sold. Thus the premature use of submarginal
resources, which would be uneconomical enough in the absence of any
taxes, receives an added stimulus from the income tax.
 This kind of investment motivation, even in its pure form, is much
more widespread than one would guess from the silence it has evoked.
Minerals exploration, acquisition of television frequencies (often with pre-
clusive or preemptive overtones), and premature extension of utility lines
to capture developing territory are obvious examples.
   But when we extend the concept a bit, the generality of it beomes re-
markable. Wicksell once noted that:                of the local character of
the firm and its market,".. . "the large enterprise has an actual monopoly
simply because it comes first on the scene, and this monopoly may be as
good as a monopoly which is legally established." Competition by a sec-
ond firm "would only lead to the ruin of both." [41, 131].
   Now look at retailers jockeying for position around every growing city,
to appreciate the man's prescience. Where there is only room for one
storeofakindnanarea,tobethereflrstistowinasortoffranchiseor
prescriptive right to the territory.
   There is also the zoning matter. The more offensive a land use is to
its neighbor; the more important for the firm to establish the use early
and establish a history of noise, air pollution, heavy traffic, garish signs,
apartments, or whatever, long before a municipality begins zoning. Thus
submarginal gasoline stations, for example, sprout up at every crossroads
in suburbia and exurbia in one of the greatest urban land speculations in
history by the largest corporations in the world, the international major oil
companies. The early losses are expensable, the future preferential zoning
is tax-free. Land is the vehicle by which the gains are secured, and the
income tax is the supercharger on the motor.
   Once one sees the pattern, the examples are legion, and every reader
can supply his own. "Possession is nine points of the law," "grandfather
clause," "vested interest," "sooner," "racing for position," "right of cus-
tomary usage," "rule of capture," "seniority," "adverse possession," "squat-
ter's rights," "historical base period," "residence requirement," "proving a
claim," "finders keepers," "old-law tenements," "prior appropriation,"
"prescriptive right," "captive market," "a defensive position," "goodwill,"
"spheres of influence," 'franchise," "service area" are familiar phrases
betraying the uneconomic favor that society has always granted to prior
position. Under the income tax this favor has risen greatly in relative
value.
                                                             j.—...-....:.          —.—   ———... ——
            -    —— — —.-——.-—.. __...,.'aPC4..




424         The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

  Summarizing, we find a market bias in favor of land, because of its
longevity; because it does not turn over; because it may in fact be written
off; because it appreciates; because its rent may be deferred; because it may
be enhanced by invesbnent of the most durable kinds; and because it may
be captured, and/or its value to the individual owner enhanced, by absorb-
ing early losses.
  This bias has implications for distribution, allocation, and macmao-
nomics. Distributionally, the lower effective rate on land means higher
rates are imposed on labor and capital. Allocationally, the high price of
land motivates diversion of capital to land substitute; both private and
public, whose longevity is extreme; and the favor given these investments
adds to the motivation. Macroeconomically, much capital is destroyed
by the losses taken to secure prescriptive rights to land, and that which
remains has a replacement rate far slower than would be optimal.
                              (Con/kited)
Resources for the Future, Inc.
Washington, 0. C. 20036


           Children's Plight in Developing Countries
"Evay HALF MINUTE, 100 children are born in developing countries.
Twentyofthemwilldiewithintheyear. OfthesOwhosun'ive,6Owill
have no access to modern medical care during their childhood. An —              H

number will suffer from malnutrition during their crucial early years,
with the possibility of irreversible physical and mental damage. Their
chancesofdyingearlywillbe2oto4otiineshigherthanfftheylived
in Europe or North America.
   "Of those who live to school age, only a little more than half will ever
setfoot in aclassroom, and less than 4 out of 10 of those who do will
complete the elementary grades."
  These few blunt facts might be called portents of the "State of the
World for the Year 2000," for they are from a recent report of the UN
Secretary-General, U Thant. He didn't have too add that todafs children
are tomorrow's adults.
   The United Nations Children's Fund is the agency of the UN family
charged with special concern for the children of the world. UNICEF has
just decided to try to double—within the next five years—the assistance               H

it is now providing 112 developing countries to help their children. It
has taken the Children's Fund 24 years to reach its present income level,
yet its sense of uigency is so great that UNICEF hopes to do twice as
much by 1975. [From the U.S. Committee for UNICEF.)
                  —.-—    ———— —-                                                It




        Tax-Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, V
                            By MAsoN GAFFNEY

                                      VI
                                    Summnry
To SUMMAPJZ€ the entire paper, we find that excise and income taxation
in their present forms tend to bias investors to longevity. We divide
assets into four classes: appreciating, constant-valued, depreciating, and
land. We find a bias to longevity within each class. Among dasses, we
find a bias for appreciating assets and land.
   As a general policy we recommend that the income tax be modified so
as to tax appreciation and deduct depreciation at the times when they
accrue. We note that this modification makes the income tax, insofar as
it falls on property income, much like the property tax. We note that the
neutrality is impaired by shifting; and the only part of the income tax that
may be made perfectly neutral is the part that falls on land income.
  Our definition of income, if correct, opens a fascinating legal point.
If the income tax, properly construed, is a property tax, then the 16th
Amendment may authorize Congress to tax property free of the crippling
rule of apportionment among states by population. The 16th Amendment
authorizes taxation of tincomes £ mm whatever source derived." The
realization doctrine is not in the Amendment, but rests on the shaky case
of Eisner v. Macomber (1920) [12]. Harold Somers has compiled sew
eral opinions suggesting the vulnerability of the doctrine. [32, 143—44].
As economics, the decision. is dearly a primitive, nothing worthy of awe
for its substance but only for the sheltered interests that would rally behind
it.
    The last 15 yeags may have witnessed a cyclical resurgence of the prop-
erty tax, but the last 50 have seen a secular displacement of it by income
and excise taxes. "Tax sharing" proposals keep nudging us along the
same route. The result is a sloughing of ancient tax burdens from prop-
erty to labor. To redress the balance it would help to give the income tax
more of the character of a property tax.
   The decision would be made by lawyers and judges. But they would
solicit the professional advice of modern economists on modem economic
concepts and definitions of income. What counsel would they receive?
Resources for the Future, inc.
Washington, D.C. 20036
106      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

                               APPENDIX   I
          By William Vickrey, }ttthew Gafthey, Jr.
                        and Joseph Hoizinger*
     Proof that effective after-tax rate of return rises with
life of investment (point-input point-output case), ithen gain
at maturity is subject to a tax at rate tE(o,           i).
     Notation is the same as in the text, except that con—
tinuous interest is used and r and I are used for the don-
tinuous interest rates corresponding to the annual rates
designated byr and I in the text.    This is done simply to
facilitate recognition. i>O; m,'O.

          rm =(1 - t)eim +        t   f(m)                            ci)

          V(n) = (1 - t)ieim                                          (2)

          rm=inf(rn)


               (;ii2 lnf(m)=[% -lnf(m (3)
      Since 2>O,       it suffices to show right hand factor of (3)
is positive.

           Let u       elm, then in ln U

           Let s E 1       t
                         t(m) = elm +          =   + s
           From Ci),
                                          1
           lnf(m)=i.n(1-t)+ln(u+s)                                    (It)


      Row the right hand faôtor of (3) is defined as:

           6(u) =              - ln(1 - t) - ln(u + s)                (5)
           g(l)=o•                                                           nj
      If g' (u)> 0 for u=.1, then g(u)O for u.2. and..for nO.

                   —   (u + s) [in u +    i] - u in u         u+s
                                                                  1
                                  (ui's)2
               ltfl10 for u-]..                           .E,D.

* Credits arc difficult to assign.   There s*s an earlier proof
by 14. Consigny, superseded by Vickrey' s more direct proof. This
Isas simplified by lttthew Gaffney, Jr., with advice fran Ralph
Krause. A final simplifying substitution was contributed by-
Joseph Hoizinger, and the present proof is his.
              Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Ca/fl/al, V               107

                          Affen&ix II
           By William Viciwey and W.cheia Cbnsigny*
Proof that an inco tax using true depreciation is inter-
temporally nettral
    let A(x) be a (continupus) cash or service stream bought
for c(o), 0 being the tine of purchase aM x the time of pqnent,
it being the date of mtwity or final paytent.     let P(x) be the
present value at tine 0 of a pa&nent of $3. at tine x.       The

instantaneous short term rate of interest at tine zis then
h(x)=-. (Theannualrateofinterestisi=e'-l.)
c(y), the value at tine y of the remaining payments from y to
in, is then given by P(y).C(y) = rP(x).A(x) x.                     (1)
      The depreciatian in capita]. value at tine y is then
obtained from (i) by differentiating with respect to y:
     P    +C      = - P(y).A(y), and by solving for the de-

preciation,     we get D(y) = -    = A(y) +      = A - bC          (2)
Now let, a tax be imposed at a rate t(y) dn the net intone
after depreciation Y = A - D, so that the tax is
t(y) LACY) - D(y)] and the net receipts alter tax are then
N = A — t(A-D) = A - thc.    Then there exists a private           (2a)
discount function R(y), such that for any asset with a
stream of pqments A(y), the ciwrent value of the asset can
be obtained eoyafly from discounting the grosspaynents A
with the public discount function P, or the vet proceeds ic

* Again, credit is hard to allocate precisely. Miss Consigny
first formulated. the problem and. proved the theorem. Professor
Viclwey great3y shortened and generalized, the proof and brought
it to its present form. A third proof by 3tthev P. Gathfl,
Jr., might equally 'weu have been presented.
                                                                                        )
108        The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

  with the private discount function B:                             dy =   dy.

  The private discount function B ifl be relateà to P and t by
  the equation
           ldR                                           laP
                                                                                  (3)


  ihere P, R, t, and h are an functions of y, h being the
  public rate of discount and r being the private rate of
  discount,      flo) = R(O) = 1.
      We have (y) N(y) dy
       =
           0"R(y) [A(y) - t(y) h(y) C(y)J '13' [using (2a)}                      (it)
       =
           0B(y) [A(y) - t(y) h(y) y.r ft3 A(x) dx) dy,                          (5)

  [using (])J
       =    fl(y) A(y)       -       r'
                                 yo x—y
                                                        t(y) h(y) R(y)
                                                             P(y)

       P(x) A(x) dx '13'                                                          (6)

  which becomes, by inverting the order of integration

                                                        t (y) h(y) R(y)
       =
           f'(3') A(y) dy -      x=olJ    y=o.                P(y)


       dy P(x) A(x) dx                                                           (7)
  Prom (s), we have lit =
                          idE + h -_ldB - laP                                    (6)
  so that 3') h(y) R(y) dy =              dIR   -        ap = a1), so             (9)
                  Py)
  that (7) becones                              x
                 A(y) '1 - J°m 1R(y).                    P(x) A(x) dx            (io)


            x)
                               )
                   A(x) dx - Nx)
       =                                            -
                                                        1] P(x) A(x) &
                             0'-

       =                   -
           or                            A(x) + P(x) A(x)) dx
       =
            f'p(x) A(x) dx = c(o).
                                                          Q2.D.
                     Tax4nduced Slow Turnover of Ca/il/al, V                          109

      Errata: In "Tax.Induced Slow Turnover of Capital, II," p. 181, n. 14, the equation
should read:
                                   In (I—i)
                                   m=
                                           [l+i(I—t)
                                               1+1
                                           L
On p. 187, line 18, for [shifting] "would push i up to a new level, i" read "would push
4 up to a new level, i." And read in line 31"... the premium of short i over long
          And read p. 188, line 15 ". . . the fact that i     " And read p. 195, line 29
"Capital must now earn i               And   on p. 196 read line 6 ". . . to earn i before
taxes." And read line 7 "at the higher rate of interest, i           And in iFik!., III, on
p. 283, line 8, read a(l + i)' as a(l + i)1.

                                     Bibliography
1. Ackley, Gardner. Macroeconomic Theory. New York: The Macmillan Company,
      1961.
2. Bailey, Martin. National income and the Price Level. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
      Co., 1962.
3. Barlow, B., H. Brazer, and 5. Morgan. Economic Behavior of the Affluent. Wash-
     ington: The Ikookings Institution, 1966.
4. v. Bohm-Bawerk, F. Positive Theory of Capita!. Vol. 2 of Capital and Interest.
     S. Holland, III.: Libertarian Press, 1959.
5. Brems, H. Output, Employment, Capital, and Grow/b. New York: Harper & Bros.,
     1959, chs. 18, 19.
6. Brown, E. Cary, "Business-Income Taxation and Investment Incentives." In income,
    Employment and Public Policy; Essays in Honor of Alvin II. Hanson. New York:
      V. V. Norton & Co., Inc., 1948. Reprinted in B. A. Musgrave and Carl Shoup
      (eds.), Readings in the Economics of Taxation. Homewood: RichardS D. Irwin, Inc.,
      1959, ch. 32, pp. 521—37.
7.            "The New Depreciation Policy under the Income Tax: An Economic An-
    alysis." National Tax Journal, 8, pp. 81—98.
8. Denton, John. "The Land Speculators." Frontier, August 1960, pp. 14-16.
9. Domar, E. Essays in the Theory of Economic Growth. New York: Oxford Uni..
      versity Press, 1917.
10. Dorau, Herbert. integration of the Straight Line Accrual. Unpublished manuscript.
11. Dorfman, B. "Waiting and the Period of Production." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
      nomics, 73 (August 1959), pp. 351—72.
12. Eisner v. Macomber (1920). 252 U.S. 189, 40 S. Ct. 189.
13. Gaffney, Mason. Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber. Raleigh: North Caro-
      lina State College1 Department of Agricultural Economics Information Series No. 62,
      1957.
14.                (ed.) Extractive Resources and Taxation. Madison: University of Wis-
      consin Press, 1967.
15. Gray, L. C. "Rent under the Assumption of Exhaustibility." Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 28 (May 1914), pp. 464—89.
16. Haig, Robert M. "Some Probable Effects of the Exemption of Improvements from
    Taxation in die City of New York." Report to Commission on Taxation for the
    City of New York, 1915.
17. Herflndahl, Orris. "Depletion and Economic Theory." In M. Gaffney, (S.), Er-
      tractive Resources and Taxation. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967.
                                                                                           )

110           The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

18. Hotelling, Harold. "Economics of Exhaustible Resources," Journal of Political Econ..
     amy, 39 (April 1931),pp. 137—75.
19. Jensen, Jens. The Property Tax in the United Stales. Chicago: University of Clii-
      cago Press, 1931, ch. 3.
20. McDonald, Stephen L. "The Effects of Severance vs. Property Taxes on Petroleum
    Conservation." In 1965 Proceedings of the National Tax Association, pp. 320—27.
21.         . "Percentage Depletion and the Allocation of Resources." National Tax
      Journal, 14- (December 1961), pp. 323—36.
22.            . "Percentage Depletion, Expensing of Intangibles and Petroleum Conser-
      vation." In M. Gaffney (ed.), Extractive Resources and Taxation. Madison: 1.lni—
      versity of Wisconsin Press, 1967.
23. Musgrave, R. A. Theory of Public Finance. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
      1959.
24. Oppenheimer, H. L. Cowboy Arithmetic. Danville: The Interstate Publishers, 1961.
25. Pechinan, Joseph A. Federal Tax Policy. Washington: Brookings Institution, 1966.
26. R.icardo, David. Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London: 1*17, cli.
     10, "Taxes on Rent."                                                          4
27. ScoCeld, William H. "Values and Competition for Land." 1963 Yearbook of Agri-
      culture, pp. 64—72.
28. Seltzer, Lawrence. The Nature and Tax Treatment of Capital Gains and Losses.
      New York; National Bureau of Economic Research, 1951.
29. Shoup, Carl. "Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax: Capital Structure and
     Turnover Rates." In National Tax Journal, March 1948, Vol. I, No. 1. Reprinted
     in K. A. Musgrave and Carl Shoup (eds.), Readings in the Economics of Taxation.
     Homewood: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., ch. 20, pp. 322—29.
30. Solomon, Ezra. "Return on Investment: The Relation of Book Yield to True Yield."
     In Research In Accounting Measurement, American Accounting Association, Col-
      lected Papers, 1966.
31. Somers, Harold. Capital Gains, Death and Gift Taxation. California State Legisla-
      ture (Assembly), 196%.
32.            . "Taxation of Capital Gains at Death." In Paul itleinsorge (ed.), Pub-
      lic Finance and Welfare: Essays in Honor of C. Ward Macy. Eugene: University
      of Oregon Books, 1966, pp. *36—55.
33. Stern, Philip. The Great Treasury Raid. New York: Random House, 1962.
34. StOCkfiSCh, J. A. "The Capitalization, Allocation, and Investment Effects of Asset
     Taxation." Southern Economic Journal, 22 (January 1956), pp. 3 17—29.
35.           . "Investment Incentive, Taxation and Accelerated Depreciation." fbi?,
     24 (July 1957), pp. 2*.-40.
36. Styche, Leonard G., and Associates, Inc., Don M. Hisata and Associates, Architects.
     Red Estate Base: The City of Shaker Heights, Ohio, Report to the City Council,
      1967.
37. Terborgh, C. Bogey of Economic Maturily. Chicago: Machinery & Allied Products
    Institute, 1945, cli. 7.
38. Vickrcy, William S. Agenda for Progressive Taxation. New York: The Ronald
      Press Co., 1947.
39.            . "Economic Criteria for Optimum Rates of Depletion." In Iii. Gaffney
      (ci), Extractive Resources and Taxation. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
      197.
                 Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital, V                        111

40. Walras, Lion. Etudes d'ECOSOInIC Soci1e (Thiork Ic Ia Repartition 4 Ia Richesse
    Soclale). 2nd Ed. Lausanne: F. Rouge cc Ce., S. A., 1936. Book 3, "The Mathe-
    maücal Theory of the Price of Land and of its Redemption by the State," u. by
    M. Gaffney, to be published as a chapter in forthcoming Readings in the Theory oj
    Land Value Taxation.
41. WickseU, K. Lectures on Political &onomy. Vol. 1 (E. Classen, tr.). New York:
    The Macmillan Co., 1938.
42. 'WiCkSCII, K. Value, Capital, and Rent, (S. H. Frowein, tr.). New York: Rinehart
     & Co., 1954.
43. The Federal Revenue System: Facts and Problems 1961. Joint Economic Committee.
     87th Cong., 1st Session, 1961.




                The Quality of Existence on Welfare
The Diary of A. N.: The Story of the House on West 104th Street.
    By Julius Horwitz. New York: Coward—McCann, Inc., 1970, 220
    pp., $5.95.
JULIUs HORW1TZ SPENT eight years as a welfare caseworker and as
consultant to the majority leader of the New York State Senate on prob-
lems of social welfare. Out of his intimate knowledge of the life a-
periences of welfare clients, out of his experience with the working and
malfunctioning of the welfare system, and out of piles of case notes and
records of interviews with hundreds of children, black and whit; second
or third generation wards of the system, he has written this sociological
novel which deserves a place beside the works of Victor Hugo and Upton
Sinclair.
   The book, presented as the diary of a 15-year-old black girl setting
down her experiences and observations, is a savage attack on a welfare
system which, instead of providing equal opportunity, offers its bene-
ficiaries just enough of a dole to keep them alive in a life style of con-
tinuing degradation. The book lets the facts of life on Manhattan's
upper West Side make their own argument. This contributes to its
powerful impact.
  At the end A. N. gets caught up in one of the anti-poverty programs
intended to break the cycle of dependency. Will she make it? The
social scientist-turned-novelist so successfully involves the reader by the
artifices of the story teller that the reader hopes so.
   Julius Horwitz's previous book, The W.AS.P., was pronounced "the
best American novel published in England in 1968." Surely the present
one will win accolades, not only from general readers but from social
