      Mason GaJney

Toward Full Employment with
Limited Land and Capital


Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by preservation,
but by perpetual reproduction.—J. S. Mill




         The Paradox of Surplus Labor, Shortages, and Inflation
  "Though custom has dulled us to it, it is a strange and unnatural thing
that men who wish to labor, in order to satisfy their wants, cannot find the
opportunity." "There can be no real scarcity of work . . . until human
wants are all satisfied." Today, nearly a century after Henry George wrote
that, and with nearly 40 years of the New Economics, we are right back at
square one. Federal fiscal and monetary policies prove powerless to soak
up surplus labor, even while creating two-digit inflation. Prominent econ-
omists seem confused and helpless faced with the most basic malfunction
of the system, that is, shortness of work along with short supplies and
soaring prices, and we are at once overwhelmed and diverted by the spawn
of derivative evils. Why cannot these idle persons find work to fill those
shortages? If economics cannot solve this elementary but stubborn riddle,
it is not good for much.
  Nor is a job what it used to be. United States wage rates have lost
ground since 1960 compared to many countries,' even as we who used to
soak up displaced world labor have reached out to control and exploit raw
materials of others.
  At the same time, the other sinews of production, capital and land, are
growing short, and very dear. Materials prices are high, even though the
social cost of primary products is higher than the price because of massive

  Research support from Resources for the Future is gratefully acknowledged.

                                          99
100                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

tax benefits and other subsidies. The required complement or duty of land
and capital per worker and consumer has risen sharply for many years,
much faster than the work force. So now we are bumping into the ineluct-
able logic that if we require a vast complement of resources per worker,
and require jobs for all, we will chew up lots of resources, and push on the
limits of Earth. We will push up materials prices; we will pollute the en-
vironment; and we will provoke our neighbors by coveting their raw
 materials. We will push on the limits of our capital supply, too, unless it
 grows faster than it has been.
   If we look to science and innovation to help us, these are mainly har-
 nessed to the goals of saving labor, and using more land and capital to
do it. Some, indeed, have revived the themes of Ned Ludd, John Henry,
and Karel Kapek, and blamed unemployment fatalistically on science and
innovation out of human control. While this vogue has happily abated for
•the nonce, it is true enough that Science has been in the saddle for a long
time without meeting the present problem.
   Along with short work we face a swelling array of derivative evils: crime,
alienation and counter-culture, protracted apprenticeship periods, soaring
welfare and dependency, frustration of idle housewives, forced early re-
tirement, geriatric ghettos, imperialism to make jobs and acquire raw
materials, weapons constituencies, other pork-barreling, glorification of
waste, slowdowns, featherbedding, fear of change, stunting of creativity
through grasping for tenure, seniority, and security, suppression of com-
petition, exclusionary local codes and zoning, loss of flexibility and mobil-
ity, and rejection of the free market. All these evils have their independent
roots, but are inflated by unemployment and the fear of it.
   Some unemployment is iatrogenic; that is, caused by the doctor. Critics
of welfare point out how welfare payments have boomed into a cause of
unemployment. Since work shortage also serves to rationalize welfare, we
have a vicious circle. But there is little doubt which came first, nor is there
much doubt that we can solve the problem humanely only by opening
more jobs, regardless of the direction of welfare reform.
   Each of the derivative evils, like welfare, could be a study in itself. Yet
until we face the elemental riddle at the fountainhead of all this trouble,
each such study only diverts us from meeting the ultimate challenge for
economists that George defined in 1879.
   The failure of fiscal and monetary policy, in which we once had such
faith that we talked of "fine-tuning," is by now so notorious we can merely
postulate it as a premise. The New Economics foundered as it steered be-
tween the shoals of inflation and the rocks of unemployment and ran onto
both at once. The New Economics taught that that would not happen.
"Fiscal Policy and Full Employment Without Inflation" was Samuelson's
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                        101

promise2 in 1955, and the world believed it. He wrote of the new "mastery
of the modern analysis of income determination," and of the "momentous
Employment Act of 1946. . . to fight mass unemployment and inflation."
Inflation could result mainly only from "overful employment."3 All that
has turned to ashes in the crucible of 15 percent inflation.
  And yet the New Economics is what taught the generation now in com-
mand, and economists of influence seem capable of little but following
Pavlovian responses learned in school twenty years ago: in a word, that the
way to make jobs is to recycle money faster. Most of what we call macro-
economics today is an embroidery on that one simple theme, the simplicity
hidden beneath elegant variations and elaborate circumlocutions that
dazzle and boggle and addle without adding much substance.
   The New Economics, when new, was positive and optimistic, and prom-
ised a lot. There were free lunches in those days—when you put the idle to
work, there is such a thing. The Puritan ethic was the goat, obsolete and
absurd, dour and dismal. But now the New Economics has become a New
Dismal Science, a science of choice where all the choices are bad. "One
must face up to the bitter truth that only so long as the economy is de-
pressed are we likely to be free of inflation" (Samuelson, 1970). "No one
in the world has a recipe for correcting our price performance without
some unfortunate increase in unemployment. . . . [the public] should be
told the facts of life" (Arthur Okun, 1970). This is not bread, but a stone.
   Conservatives are not offering more. ". . . there is no other way to stop
inflation. There has to be some unemployment. . . . It is a fact of life"
(Milton Friedman, 1970).6 "The election will show whether the American
people are mature enough to accept a sustainable (low) level of activity"
(Henry Wallich, 1970). ". . . this economy can no longer stand a real
boom with low levels of unemployment without kicking off a rampant in-
flationary spiral" (Alan Greenspan, 1972).8 Thus it seems that conserva-
tives unite with liberals in seeing the choice as a trade-off on a Phillips
Curve, and differ mainly in preferring to disemploy more and inflate less.
There is little challenge to the conceptual framework. Controlling spend-
ing is where it's all at.
   Monetarists debate Keynesians over the most effective way to regulate
spending, and are more disposed to favor less of it, and recognize other
constrains. Yet neither side much deviates from the premise that spending
money is the governor of the economy, the autonomous force which other
activity obeys, the key of control. "The collective intelligence of the eco-
nomics profession is unable to fundamentally restructure the intellectual
substance of the field. . . . We have a theoretical apparatus that can be
used for a wide variety of things. There is no other way, and I do not think
we know how to find one (Otto Eckstein, 1974).
102                                                     LAND USE EFFECTS

    Yet, along with the policy failures, there are intellectual substances and
 theoretical apparati one can identify which are clearly wrong, and must
 interfere with any effort to make jobs. Modern macroeconomics evolved
 under a different set of problems than we face today, and its founders
 built into its vitals a number of special premises and limitations. It is
 geared to assume no or few resource constraints, and has little response
for the new challenges of environment, scarce raw materials, and anti-
growthmanship. "Growth," indeed, is one of its ideals, and simply to
make jobs in a stable equilibrium independent of growth is outside its
purview. Geared to approve waste, it has nothing for emerging needs to
conserve scarce resources. Geared to define the economic problem as how
to dispose of surpluses, it ill becomes a world of excess demand and short
supplies. Geared to treat capital as a glut, and the central economic prob-
lem as how to dispose of excess saving, it is at a loss with high interest rates
and capital shortage.
  The falling rate of profit is built into the apparatus, and Samuelson is
still disputing that capital is really short. 10 Geared to treat both re-
sources and capital as cheap, it all too easily lets labor be treated as
the only cost of production worth mentioning—a new labor theory of
value—ignores distribution, and plays into the hands of antilabor interests
by picturing the economic scene as a continuous "wage-price spiral." It
ignores the possibilities of substituting labor for land and capital. Geared
to idealize federal spending, it drifts easily into mercantilism and im-
perialism, especially in the more idealistic, missionary faces of AID and
"economic development." Geared to accept and live with concentration of
wealth and economic power, it has little to say about the effects of indus-
trial mergers in substituting capital for labor by putting plants on standby
and laying off workers. It has no basis for not condoning the monumental
waste of capital in urban sprawl, or the global sprawl of imperialism, be-
cause each inflated need is an investment outlet. On the contrary, con-
tinuous territorial expansion and development are its answers to the
limited land supply.
   In the apparatus of modern macroeconomics, it is built in that the best
way to recycle stagnant money is to find investment outlets. Since the rate
of profit is always threatening to push zero, such outlets are to be cher-
ished, and we should subsidize and force-feed investment if needed, as by
loans at low interest, to keep money recycling. If we stack up layers of
capital at low productivity, that is no problem. Seminal investments like
roads and water supplies that open new lands are best of all, for they
induce ancillary investments which recycle yet more stagnant money.
Boondoggling is all right because it makes jobs, and if it soaks up a dis-
proportionate quota of capital per job, that helps dispose of excess saving.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          103

  The result of this attitude has been to let a thousand policies bloom which
foster substituting capital for labor. This finds support from some other
errors or half-truths left over from the old economics which die very hard.
   One of these is to define "efficiency" as output per worker. Only very
recently, with the birth of the concept of total factor productivity, and the
new emphasis on energy-efficiency, are most economists beginning to es-
cape this perverse concept with its built-in bias against use of labor.
   Substituting capital and land for labor raises "efficiency," so conceived,
only by wasting capital and land, and is only efficient in unrealistic models
in which land and capital are underpriced or ignored. High labor-effi-
ciency then means low land-efficiency and low capital-efficiency, either
directly or at one remove in the form of low energy-efficiency, low water-
efficiency, low feed-grain efficiency, etc.
   Misled by this concept, we have exulted in high c!utput per man as a
symbol and measure of national and company "productivity," and ac-
cepted an extreme substitution of capital and resources for labor. The
well-known displacement of farm labor is not an exception but more like
the rule. John Kendrick calculated that the ratio of capital to labor for a
large group of industries in the United States rose at an average annual
rate of 1.3 percent from 1899 to 1953. ' That means a 100 percent increase
over that fifty-four-year period. More recently, the United States Depart-
ment of Commerce studied nonfinancial corporations, 1948-1971. It
found capital inputs growing at 4 percent yearly compounded and labor at
1.2 percent.'2 That means there was 2.5 times as much capital in 1971
with 1.3 times as much labor, which is 1.9 times as much capital per
worker in 1971. Thus the rate of substitution seems to be increasing.
   And that's not really the half of it. These studies omitted the public
sector, the infrastructure into which we have poured so much public
treasure at low interest rates. They omitted housing, which soaks up so
much capital per job created. They omitted the recreation boom, which
requires so much more land and equipment per consumer hour, and per
measure of personal joy, than the quiet pleasures of yesteryear. And they
omit the swing of consumers toward goods and services like electric power
and natural gas, whose production is capital-intensive and whose prices
fall relative to labor-intensive products when the capital input is subsid-
ized.
   Producers also use much more of these as inputs. A primary metal like
aluminum will consume 135 kwh per dollar of value-added, compared to
10-20 in a normal manufacturing operation. It is energy-inefficient and
thrives only on underpriced energy, thanks to which it is cheap relative to
competing materials. For years we have been substituting energy for labor
and calling it progress and efficiency, only to find that energy is scarce and
104                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

labor surplus. A comprehensive accounting of our lavish input of capital
and land per worker would reverse the common stereotype that labor
invented featherbedding.
  The second supporting ancient half-truth is that capital cannot really
displace labor, in a vertically integrated whole economy, because labor
produces capital anyway. This is the counterpart of the modern macro-
economist's concept that investment employs labor. Either way you per-
ceive it, the meaning is that benefits to capital are passed through to
labor.
  That is a half-truth, and the untrue half has helped lead us into our
present crisis. The problem is that capital can substitute for labor. It is a
problem that neo-Georgists, in their zeal to untax capital, have overlooked
as well.
  Keynesians and Georgists have this in common. Keynesians say invest-
ment creates jobs and Georgists say labor produces capital. Keynesians
would subsidize investment and Georgists would untax capital. Many
Keynesians would untax or downtax the income from capital, too, Key-
nesians focusing on the income tax and Georgists on the property tax. The
investment tax credit, expensing of capital investments, accelerated de-
preciation and exempting imputed income of homeowners are the income
tax counterparts of exempting buildings from the property tax. Jack
Stockfisch had the insight to point out years ago that these Keynesian
inducements to invest were Georgist ideals applied to the income tax.'3
Both schools share the idea that benefits to capital are benefits to labor.
   But a great deal of the cash and service flow from capital imputes to
capital as such, as interest. The longer the life of the capital item, gen-
erally, the larger share that is. A great deal of interest is internalized and
invisible, hence too easily overlooked and forgotten. But a couple of
simple examples should make the point.
  When one buys a durable good on the installment plan, if the payments
stretch out beyond fifteen or so years more than half the total is interest.
Just how many years depends on the interest rate and the term, but at say
10 percent over a twenty-year term the yearly payment required is 11.7
percent of the principal. Twenty times 11.7 percent is 2.34. Since the prin-
cipal is one, the interest is 1.34. So, 1.34/2.34 or 57 percent of the pay-
ments are interest.
   Thus the cost of a mortgaged house, or a debt-financed highway, or a
debt-financed war èan be mainly interest. But even if these are not debt-
financed, they cost interest—the interest foregone on the equity capital.'4
A house thus "financed" over sixty years at 10 percent requires yearly level
payments of 10.03 percent of the principal. Sixty times 10.03 percent is
6.02, so 5.02/6.02 or 83 percent of the payments are interest. Accordingly,
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          105

it is understandable that housing starts are more sensitive to financing
than to any other cost.
   But note now how little of the salable service flow is produced by labor.
It would only be (100 — 83) percent or 17 percent even if the entire con-
struction bill were for payroll. In fact, of course, onsite labor is only 20
percent or so of construction cost. Materials like lumber take another big
chunk. But lumber comes from trees which take decades to grow. One
dollar invested in forest regeneration must double every 7.2 years to yield
10 percent, so if lumber comes from second-growth cut at age 9 x 7.2 or
65, stumpage of $2 of $512 embodies $1 of planting labor and $511 of
compound interest. Of course harvesting, hauling, milling, and selling
apply more labor to add value, so lumber value embodies a higher share of
labor value than timber alone. Still, timber is a splendid second example
of capital-intensity where it is largely capital, and not labor, that produces
capital.
  Timber growth is a good example of "passive investment." It is
internally financed in the most literal way. Each year's growth is a
product, an income to the owner, which he automatically invests in grow-
ing stock, adding to capital. But this investment employs no labor. It only
employs capital and land, that is, growing stock and site. Mature timber,
finally, has not been produced by labor so much as by capital—the young
growing stock—and land.
   Preferential tax treatment for timber, then, is a good way to make work
for capital but a bad way for labor. Capital-gains treatment of timber
sales, expensing of interest and property taxes, and preferential low prop-
erty-tax rates and assessments for timber tie up capital in the slowest of
cycles and fence off land from labor, except once a century or so when the
crop is cut. The job-creating efficiency of capital frozen this way is very
low.
   A third ancient error is that it takes a fixed quota of capital to "create"
a job, visualized as a kind of niche made of capital in which we place one
worker. The weekly ads of Warren and Swasey pound this theme recur-
rently, and Norman Ture, writing for the National Association of Manu-
facturers, has dignified it with an economist's formality.'5 If the premise
were true, of course, then the way to make jobs is to create capital, case
closed. But in fact, factor mix varies over a wide range, and policies which
are more certain to raise capital needs than capital formation are not a
way to make jobs. Capital is capable of complementing labor, but the ex-
tent to which it actually does so depends entirely on how it is invested and
used, and cannot be assumed. The value of capital to labor depends on
how active the capital is. Looking ahead, we will see that each time capital
is recovered and reinvested it can recombine with and reactivate labor. But
106                                                  LAND USE EFFECTS

torpid capital, like that in trees, and many public works, and premature
exploration, and so on is withdrawn from abetting labor. It may preempt
land as well, just as the landlords' sheep did in sixteenth-century England.
   In the growth models of and following Harrod and Domar, New Econ-
omists have been quite comfortable with assumed constant ratios of
capital to output. Growth was linked closely with capital formation. This
harmonized nicely with the Warner and Swasey assumption. It all served
to reconcile the Marxist streak in the New Economists with the puritanism
of capitalists. The New Economists viewed growth as an escape from the
doom of oversaving; the capitalists saw it as their social duty, which ra-
tionalized and helped aggrandize their functions, prerogatives, incomes,
wealth, and status. It has been a curious but powerful partnership, hardly
challenged until it brought us double-digit inflation.
   It has had to exclude, however, from its intellectual substance and theo-
retical apparatus the good news buried in a few obscure pages of Wick-
sell, ' that capital can increase its "valence" (to borrow a chemical term)
for labor easily, an1 combine with more or less, in response to relative
prices. We may not need to find a new theory, but resurrect one.
   Like any entrenched system, the New Economics was unassailable when
things went tolerably well, regardless of its merits. Now that its single-
minded preoccupation with purchasing power as the job-maker is inflict-
ing us with intolerable inflation, and failing to make jobs, it is time to
review and reconstruct. The New Economics has grown old, and become a
terminal case. It had to break down because it was superficially based.
The suffering is not welcome, but the opportunity for review is.
   Faced with a surplus of labor and a shortage of land and capital, an
obvious way to adapt is to substitute labor for land and capital, at the
margins of course, making all processes more labor-using. Thus we would
increase the use of labor without pushing on the limits of Earth, without
invdiñg others' land, and without needing more capital.
   It is not a questibn of stopping growth. There is no need to divide into
factions for and against growth. We can grow by combining more labor
with the same land and capital. It is simply a matter of modifying pro-
cesses and products and consumption.'7 Each time the capital recycles it
can embody new techniques as well. Growth of capital is not needed for
progress; turnover is. And since one way to substitute labor for capital is
to turn over capital faster, this also accelerates embodiment of new knowl-
edge in real capital.
   This study develops a thesis that we can employ ourselves as fully as we
wish without any of the unpleasantness we now suffer in the name of jobs:
without inflating, without borrowing, without fighting, without polluting,
without any compulsion to "grow," "develop" and expand, without
GAFF NE y: Toward Full Employment                                         107

wasting, without price and wage controls, without invading more wilder-
ness, without impoverishing posterity, without socializing labor or capital,
without dirigisme, without giving up freedom, and without overspilling
our national boundaries. Economic policy can offer better than dismal
choices.
   The problem is too much displacement of labor. It is "too much" be-
cause it results from biased institutions, a large set of them, operating over
many years, which artificially induce substituting land and capital for
labor. The way to solve the problem is to identify and remove the biases.
This will increase demand for labor without requiring any more resources
or capital.
   No special rate of growth is required. We simply need to grow (or even
not grow) in such a way as to combine each worker with less land and capi-
tal than now; to run with a leaner mixture of wealtl, richer of labor.
   There is no need to go any further and reverse the bias in favor of labor.
The operation of a free market with flexible prices to serve as equilibrators
should do the job. The idea is to make jobs not by waste but in the process
of mixing inputs more efficiently. This is the very sort of thing that a flexi-
ble economy can do. Just as the United States could retool for war quickly
in 1942, given the will, now we can retool for new jobs quickly given the
will, the freedom, and a certain know-how in framing public policy.
   We will also see that substituting labor for capital, "structural" change
in another world from macroeconomics, refuses to stay in that pigeon-
hole. It entails faster recovering of capital, and faster ripening of capital
into final goods. The first increases the rate of reinvestment; the second
the flow of consumer goods. Thus the "structural" substitution is a mac-
roeconomic effect of the most central kind.
   Let us ask how those matters fit into the concerns of the Committee on
Taxation, Resources and Economic Development and of those of other
neo-Georgists. One set of institutional biases against labor is in tax
policy—and I am limiting this paper to that set. These taxes affect the way
we develop resources. In its founding articles the committee expresses a
concern for how land taxation affects employment. It has focused on other
aspects of its work, which was desirable to build a base of expertise, but is
all the more reason for compensating now and building on that base to
achieve the original, more ambitious goals.
   The original high interest in land taxation as expounded by Henry
George has never been matched since. George did not write primarily on
municipal finance, important as that is. The problem he posed was more
cosmic and gripping, the association of poverty with progress; of "indus-
trial depression; of labor condemned to involuntary idleness; . . ." That is,
George addressed the same problems as Keynes and the New Economists.
108                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

He said these resulted from an artificial scarcity of land. Like Keynes, he
thought positively. He did not hand us another dismal iron law of inevit-
able suffering. He pointed to a solution—we could thaw the frozen land,
the passive factor, by taxing it, and employ labor, the active factor, by un-
taxing activity and labor and its products, that is, capital. He said there
was no limit in a truly free economy on jobs, other than human desires for
the fruits of work. This theme commanded attention because that was the
problem needing solving, even as today. In the more evolved lexicon of
modern economics we would say he favored "changing factor propor-
tions" or "substituting labor for land," but that would not change the
substance or the importance.
  Again like the New Economists, George was weak on capital theory. He
ran labor and capital together, seeing their interest as one and set off
against landowners'. He overlooked the substitutability of capital for
labor, that which looms so large in Austrian School economics. Keynes
and George alike treated the Austrians as their natural enemies, an un-
fortunate and needless impoverishment of their respective philosophies.
  The oversight in George was not so serious, because he wanted to untax
labor, not just capital. The oversight by neo-Georgists is serious, because
their emphasis has been largely on untaxing capital. But if we untax
capital and continue to tax payrolls, we stack the cards against labor, we
bias the system to substitute capital for labor.
  It is important, as George said, to use more workers per unit of land
and primary products. It is also important, as he did not say and we are in
danger of overlooking, to use more workers per unit of capital. To support
that thesis, I have four points in what follows:
A.. Factor mixes vary over a wide range and are by inference sensitive to
    relative costs aiid other stimuli like tax bias.
B. Tax bias force-feeds land and capital into the production mix but
   militates against labor.
C. Demand for capital is not a sufficient or even neéessary condition to
   make jobs. It often helps, but there is a trade-off in the factor mix be-
   tween labor and capital. We must distinguish among investment out-
   lets and find policies to guide investment into more labor-using ones.
D. Using labor for capital means recovering and replacing capital oftener,
      which increases aggregate demand for labor, as well as the flow of con-
      sumable goods and services so long as there is surplus labor to employ.
      It increases theflow of gross investment associated with any given jlrnd
      of capital.
  Based on that analysis we can then see how to invest so as to put capital
where the jobs are, to invest so that the "job-creating efficiency," if you
will, of capital and land is higher—not a maximum, but an optimum
GAFF NE y: Toward Full Employment                                        109

where idleness is only voluntary and the amount of capital suffices that
people save voluntarily. And we can finally mention wnat tax policies
would serve to remove the present bias.

               A. Factor Mix Is Sensitive to Factor Prices
  We can make more jobs by using more workers (W) per unit of land (L)
and capital (K). That this is feasible is suggested by showing that the mix
of factors already ranges widely, that some employers already mix enough
workers with their land and capital to employ everyone if only most other
employers were moved to act a little more like them. That which needs
doing is already being done, it just needs to be done mpre. We will identify
some of the kinds of firms and employments that use more labor in the
mix, i.e., a high W/(L + K). Then we can see how to stop penalizing
them, and get more like them.
  The goal is not to make work for its own sake. Where the "job-creating
efficiency" of wealth is higher, the goods-creating efficiency is higher, too.
We will show that one can produce many times more from the same land by
applying more labor, and without wasting labor.
  The most ancient, basic and self-evident of economic relationships is
that between land and opportunity. Tribes and nations have warred over
control of rich and strategic land, and we are still at it. But more
perceptive observers, of whom few could match Adam Smith, have noted
that the value of the resources to labor depends on how actively the owners
use it. "In plenty of good land the English colonies of North America .
are . . . inferior to those of the Spaniards and Portuguese. . . . But the
political institutions of the English colonies have been more favorable to
the improvement and cultivation of this land. . . . First, the engrossing of
uncultivated land . . . has been more restrained in the English colonies
than in any other. . . . The plenty and cheapness of good land . . . are the
principal causes of the rapid prosperity of new colonies. The engrossing of
land, in effect, destroys this plenty and cheapness. The engrossing of
uncultivated land, besides, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement."18
  Henry George gave this theme center stage in his philosophy,
attributing unemployment to speculative withholding of some land from
use. Labor needed access to land. It had access to some lands, but these
were oases in the speculative desert. Today we call this "urban sprawl" or
"scatteration," essentially a condition of extremely different intensities of
use on neighboring lands, and a common one as we know. Smith and
George wrote in black and white contrasts. More generally, land is fallow,
"engrossed," or "held in speculation" by degrees, and in this sense sprawl
and scatter are the universal condition.
   Economists seem well aware that factors blend and mix in a range of
110                                                  LAND USE EFFECTS

ratios. The principle of variable proportions is well preserved by text
writers, if only in formaldehyde. It lives when economists criticize engi
neers for taking a fixed "requirements" approach to the alleged "need"
for some input like water or power by firms or consumers. Economists
speak of tradeoffs, choices, and substitution in response to prices and
incentives. They publish data on changes over time, as that cited above,
(although regrettably one reads twenty times of declining capital to output
ratios for once of rising capital to worker ratios). They note the contrast
among nations and regions resulting from different relative prices: more
labor per log in European than Canadian sawmills; more labor per acre on
Japanese than Argentine farms; more capital per acre-foot of water in the
citrus groves of arid Tulare County, California, than the rice fields of the
Sacramento Valley. They have noted that larger companies and govern-
ments tend to favor more capital-using techniques.
   They have been less good about attributing some of these contrasts to
institutional bias. There is a strong positive relationship between belief in
tradeoffs and devotion to the price system, and too often these contrasts of
factor mix are adduced to rationalize the price system when in fact they
display the bias of institutions like taxation.
  They have been no good at all about working all this into macro-
economics, which is supposed to help us make jobs. Labor is treated
almost as the only cost, so wage cuts might only lead to "vicious downward
spirals," and wage boosts can only be shifted forward in "vicious
inflationary spirals." Since factor price flexibility up or down is vicious,
the only way to make jobs is by "growth," with a fixed requirement of
capital per job (as in Harrod-Domar models). There is no thought of
making jobs simply by enriching the mix with more labor—that would be
retrogressive, lowering "productivity," or reactionary and unmentionable.
There is if anything a sense of predestination that forces us to use ever
more capital per worker.
   We are left with a theory of compulsive growth.
   Worse, when it comes to intensifying the use of land, it often turns out
to be other peoples'. We were ready to believe that jobs depended on
taking land from the aborigines, and Alvin Hansen integrated Keynesian
fatalism with traditional Americana by attributing stagnation in part to
the closing of the frontier. Today, many economists sieze on our loss of
cheap foreign oil and other primary products as the killer of jobs. In fact,
the frontier was a great sink of capital, and the energy industry is, too,
both in production and consumption.
   Frontier expansionism neglects the inner frontier, the intensive, use of
labor on the land we already have. The old cowboy and sodbuster heroes
GAFF NE Y: Toward Full Employment                                        111

left conservationist agriculture as an afterthought to immigrants and
outgroups outside the mainstream. Current United States mercantilism,
which has it that United States labor depends on foreign resources, over-
looks the fact that cheap energy powers the farm machinery that drives
labor off the farms—it combines with capital and land, not labor. Berndt
and Wood are finding that energy use is highly related to capital use, not
labor,t9 in a comprehensive study of American industry. Note that the
"inner frontier" of energy refers not merely or mainly to producing more
primary energy domestically, but to combining energy with more labor as
we use the energy—otherwise perceived as economizing on energy.
  To be sure we have urbanized, which looks like intensifying the use of
land. Yet instead of really urbanizing the people we have suburbanized
the cities. In forty years past we have halved the density of cities.
"Intensification" has meant invading farm land, sinking enormous capital
into new roads and pipes and lines. Providing urban water unleashes
municipal hydro-imperialism, as cities range far away to capture remote
waters rather than clean and develop near sources. Thus American
urbanization replicates the continental frontier and global expansion. We
intensify the other fellow's land, and use up our capital prodigally as we do.
   It would be a mistake, then, to think that making jobs by applying more
labor to land, the policy advanced here, would entail more conversion of
farm to city land, more new towns, "development," shopping cen-
ters, industrial parks, and the like, or more territorial expansion or
mercantilism. Those generally are aspects of raising, not lowering, the
required complement of land per worker.
  Here follow some data to illustrate how widely factor mixes range. The
data refer to neighboring lands, generally, of comparable quality and in
the same markets. The differences therefore display that factor mix is
sensitive to shadings of input prices so slight that they are not equalized by
the market—differences internal to families and firms such as result from
credit ratings, tax positions, political cOnnections, and other institutional
biases. For example, an immigrant with many children goes heavier on
labor, a speculator with friends in the banks and the Capitol favors lands,
while a doctor with income to shelter might invest heavily in depreciable
capital.
  The first data are from California farming. In the San Joaquin Valley,
east side, land is versatile among many competing uses. These range from
dryland grazing up to citrus, fresh tomatoes, and berries. Grazing might
gross $15 from the animal units; tomatoes might gross $1,500 a year, 100
times as much. The specific prices are subject to secular and cyclical and
inflationary change, but the basic principles are not: the same land yields
112                                                         LAND USE EFFECTS

TABLE 6.1
Crop Production, Friant-Kern Canal Service Area
Crop                                                   Acres        Value per acre ($)
Barley                                                  15,696             51.09
Corn                                                    10,490             96.68
Rice                                                       907            167.66
Sorghums                                                17,279             74.77
Wheat                                                   3,176              87.85
Alfalfa hay                                            63,460             144.11
Irrigated pasture                                      17,388              77.66
Beans, dry and edible                                   4,293             107.14
Cotton, lint (upland)                                 108,928             352.80
Asparagus                                               1,383             418.70
Beans (processing)                                         27             900.00
Beans (fresh market)                                       75             975.33
                             -
Corn, sweet (fresh market)                                 254            205.91
Lettuce                                                   423             336.51
Cantaloupes, etc.                                          507            547.02
Onions, dry                                               686             495.70
Potatoes, early                                         12,711            366.04
Tomatoes (fresh market)                                  1,343            881.16
Alfalfa                                                  1,279            151.79
Berries (all kinds)                                        80           1,215.60
Oranges and tangerines                                 24,952             915.51
Grapes, table                                          43,795             545.24
Olives                                                   7,172            327.45
Peaches                                                  6,371            644.38
Prunes and plums                                         3,288            674.00
Walnuts                                                  1,374            338.14
  Source: Sacramento Office, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, 1958. Minor crops omitted.

a little or a lot, depending on what you mix with it. Table 6.1 is a crop
report gathered by the United States Bureau of Reclamation from its
Friant-Kern Canal Service Area. Not all the land is versatile among all the
options, but a close study of the area has shown that the margins between
the uses are ragged.2° Almost every area has several options, and many of
them are choices between the highest and the lowest gross. Labor's share
of gross rises with intensity, defined here simply as nonland inputs ÷
output.2' For grazing, this is on the order of $6/$15 40%. For tomatoes
it is more like $1,400/$1,500 = 93%.
    Of course the return to land from tomatoes is highly leveraged and
volatile, as a short-run gamble, but that is not our concern here.
Averaging out the good years and the bad, the return to land from
tomatoes is very sensitive to wage rates and other costs of hiring like
payroll taxes. A slight rise of 7 percent nearly wipes out the rent; a drop of
7 percent nearly doubles it. But the same wage changes would only
GAFF NE Y: Toward Full Employment                                        113

imperceptibly change the returns to land from grazing. Thus a slight drop
of labor costs applies great pressure to shift land to tomatoes and other
high-yield, labor-intensive crops, making a very elastic demand for labor.
  The scope for this kind of change is manifest in the fact that most of
California's farm output comes from a tiny fraction of her good farm land,
that which is used intensively.
  Of the several million acres of irrigable land in California, there were in
1960 21,000 acres in plums, 36,000 in freestones, and 65,000 in navels.22
Most of the other land was and is used at lower intensities, using less labor
to yield fewer dollars worth of barley, alfalfa, forage pasture, hay,
sorghum, safflower, rice, or cotton.
   In irrigated farming, water is an indirect land input, since a water right
is the right to the water yield of a vast watershed. One might then think
the tomatoes really use a lot of land in the form of irrigation water. But in
fact the high-grossing crops such as tomatoes, citrus, peaches, and berries
are modest users of water. Pasture, alfalfa, and rice are thirsty crops, and
they yield only $50-$200 per acre, not one-tenth of the high yielders.
   The high-grossing crops use more labor per acre not just in the fields
but in the packing houses, the railroads, the stores, and the kitchens. A
$900 tomato crop will use more labor at every step to the consumer than
a $15 weight gain on a calf, do it sooner, and much more often. Thus a
higher use of labor in the field increases demand for labor beyond the
field. Reciprocally,. lower costs between consumer and farmer, raising
field prices by say 7 percent, would (in our example) double land returns
from tomatoes and increase demand for labor on the farm.
   In Iowa, a more uniform state, Shrader and Landgren have calculated
that if all farmers followed the standards already practiced by the most
advanced farmers, Iowa alone could supply the nation's output of feed
grain.23
  Farm land use in general varies so much from farm to farm that "farm
sprawl" and "horticultural sprawl" are as common as urban sprawl. But
this reminds us that all our cities are dominated by sprawl, which is
essentially a condition of extremely different intensities on adjacent lands.
Different mixes of land with nonland inputs are not the exception but the
rule.
  It does not surprise tax economists, of course, to learn about differences
of factor proportions, for that is at the heart of the problem of tax
enclaves. As everyone knows, localities compete to attract capital-using
plants and to repel labor-using ones, and they find large differences
among them.
  Factor mix also tends to change with size of business and wealth of
individuals. As a broad statistical truth, the application of labor to
114                                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

property tends to be regressive. The larger holdings use less labor per unit
of property value.
  The United States Census ofAgriculture ranks farms by value of gross
sales. In 1950, "Class I" farms, those grossing $25,000 or more, had 22
percent of the land in farms but 7 percent of the farm labor. The small

TABLE 6.2
Land, Buildings, and Implements and Machinery; Average Values per Acre, by Size of
Farm, 1940
                     Land                             I&M          As percentages of land value
  Size group                        Buildings
    (acres)          $/acre          $/acre           $/acre           Bldgs           I&M
    Under3           728.00         1,618.00          192.00           222.2            26.4
       3-9           15.00            225.00           22.00           144.2            14.1
      10-19           79.00            69.00            8.85            87.3            11.2
      20-49           41.00            28.00            5.00            68.3            12.2
      50-99           30.00            19.00            4.59            63.3             15.3
    100-174           29.00            15.00            4.54            51.7             15.7
    175-259           30.00            13.00            4.36            43.3             14.5
    260-499           26.66             8.34            3.44            31.3             12.9
    500-999           18.50             4.50            2.28            24.3             12.3
  1,000&over          8.29            1.13        0.64                  13.6   7.7
   Total, U.S.       21.90            9.81        2.88         44.8          13.1

   Source: United States Department of Agriculture, 1940 Census of Agriculture, vol. 3,
p. 80. Percentages calculated by writer.

TABLE 6.3
Profits per Employee, Large and Small Industrial Firms, Ranked by Net Worth
                                           Profit after
Group                  Net Worth              taxes            Employees       Profits/employee
                       ($000,000)          ($000,000)            (000)                 ($)
Top 10                    40,090.           5,470.              1,662.               3,291.
All 500                  133,660.          14,839.              9,966.               1,489.
Lowest 10                    116.               8.826              29.687              297.
  Source: Calculated from data in the Fortune Directory, 1964.
  Note: Like any data, these might be massaged a good deal more. In particular I surmise
that adding unrealized appreciation to profits would raise the profits per employee more for
the top ten than for the others, since six of the top ten are oil companies, and all ten are
major mineral owners. But this information is not available.
  The lowest ten include one net loser, without which the profits per employee would be $690
instead of $297. However, negative profits are also relevant, and there are twelve firms in the
500 with net losses. Most of these are in the lowest 100, so it is representative to find one loser
among any group of ten. Therefore $297 seems more accuiate than $690.
  Net worth was used for ranking in order to reduce the bias of regression fallacy. (Had I
ranked byprofits, the top ten would not have changed much, but the lowest ten would all
have been firms with negative profits.) Although it is only partly successful in that, the trends
shown are strong enough to survive further purification.
GAFF N EY: Toward Full Employment                                          115

producers of course made the figures balance by applying more labor per
acre.
  The use of labor on land by and large increases with the improvements
there—not so much in building them, for they are infrequently replaced,
but in using them. Farm machines tend to displace labor. Farm buildings
shelter and store outputs and inputs and labor itself, complementing
labor. From 1900 to 1940 the United States Census of Agriculture
reported separately on land and buildings. Table 6.2 supports the thesis of
regressive use of land. (1940 is the latest year available, because unfor-
tunately the United States Census then discontinued the series.)
  Note that implements and machinery, which displace labor, decline
much less with acreage than buildings do.
  John Riew presented similar data from Wisconsin farm counties, at last
year's meeting of this committee.24 Other studies finding this pattern are
by Morton Paglin25 and Albert Berry.26 Don Kanel, Peter Dorner, John
Strasma, Philip Raup, and several other farm economists have piled up
data showing the point.
   Turning to "industrial" corporations, the regressive use of labor on
property may be inferred from data in Fortune Magazine's yearly report
 on the largest 500. I tested the thesis by ranking them by "net worth" or
 invested capital, and calculating profits (after taxes) per employee. Table
6.3 shows the broad results.
   The choice of profits/employee to test the case premises that profits in
general are the realized earnings of and some index to the real assets of a
firm. In fact, if the larger firms use their property less intensively (as this
and other evidence suggests), then their realized profits as an index under-
state the assets of larger firms compared to smaller ones.
   If there is something about size of business that discourages labor use, it
would follow that mergers tend to result in reduced jobs on given assets.
Jon Udell has found just that in his study of mergers in Wisconsin.27 A
wealth of fragmentary evidence suggests that this finding would be dupli-
cated elsewhere.
   The largest organization is government. The public sector is the most
property-using of all. It has a reputation for wasting labor, and in some
cases conspicuously does. But it pays the market for labor, while it bor-
rows below the market. As to land, it still holds much more than anyone,
tax free and unmortgaged, with little internal pressure or shadow price to
reflect the foregone gains.
  The military, for example, holds 20 percent of San Francisco and
Washington, D.C., virtually idle. The annual value of this kind of lavish
land input does not appear in the budget. The National Forests use much
more capital (as timber) per man employed than do private ones, espe-
116                                                 LAND USE EFFECTS

cially small private ones, a fact of which Forest Service doctrine makes a
virtue. Richard Muth has concluded that the outstanding distinguishing
trait of public housing is its higher capital-intensity.28 Civil engineers,
generally working for governments, have become notorious for producing
white elephants by treating capital—not labor—as a free good, and for
overstating future benefits next to present costs by using low interest
rates.29 One can justify any project using a low enough interest rate and
ignoring land costs, and many agencies have, because at zero interest the
present value of future rents in perpetuity equals infinity.
   Private utilities are capital-using, of course. But governments supply
the most capital-using utilities, like water and sewer, which are increas-
ingly costly because of urban sprawl. Governments are always called on to
put up social front money, to push back and invade frontiers, territorial
and otherwise, where the payoff is too slow for private capital. Public
buildings (other than schools) are often monumental, baroque, cavernous,
marbled, and better sited than their function warrants.
   Few city governments have analyzed the costs and benefits of peripheral
expansion carefully before plunging outwards. The taxpayers of older
areas characteristically finance the development of new areas for years and
decades before the newly serviced lands return enough taxes to pull their
weight. It is another long span of years before they return the advance of
capital, by generating fiscal surpluses above their share of public costs.
 Such is the lag of private building behind public works that the public
capital is sunk for years before payout.
   A perfectly analogous case that has received detailed study is the lag of
 private behind public capital in irrigation projects. The classic is Weeks
 and West.3° Public capital flowed into irrigation ten to thirty years ahead
of complementary private capital, leaving the public to finance dead
capital in the meantime. But that was before the great explosion of state
and federal financing, and later problems have grown larger.
  Factor mix also changes over time. We often read of declining capital/
output ratios, but these do not show declining capital intensiveness be-
cause labor/output ratios are declining faster. The data from John Ken-
drick and the United States Department of Commerce were cited above.
As noted, they only cover part of the private sector and omit the public.
The public has been freezing up capital in public works, much of it at low
productivity at a disproportionately high rate. Ironically, much of this was
done in the name of making jobs.
  If labor had been scarce, and capital surplus during the period of these
changes, the changes would have made sense. But labor has suffered
chronic and at times acute unemployment, while the world cried out for
capital, and nations have warred over lands and minerals. It would seem
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          117

to show a set of factor prices and/or institutional biases that do not reflect
the facts. Marxists and other technological determinists have averred that
changing techniques are inevitably more capital using, but most econo-
mists today would recognize that the course of inventions and their appli-
cation depend on relative costs. Technology evolves in response to costs,
rather than being an autonomous mover of history. We are left with insti-
tutional bias as the likely cause of the failure of the economy to soak up
surplus labor.
   The source of this bias is not far to seek. To enrich the mix with labor
we would need to encourage the things that humble folk do, and take the
fun out of many things that the rich and mighty do. It is not impossible,
but it does call for a more effective philosophy than the poor and needy
have embraced in the New Economics.
   Let us underscore what the facts just cited imply about the elasticity of
demand for labor. On some lands and in some firms labor is 90 percent of
costs. Property gets 10 percent. The return to property is here highly lev-
eraged by changes in the price of workers. An 11 percent drop to labor
doubles the return to land and capital; an 11 percent rise wipes them out.
At the other extreme, where labor is 10 percent of costs, one could cut the
wage rate in half and only raise the property income by 5.5 percent.
   All of the above may seem only marginally relevant to some readers be-
cause of their beliefs (1) that land is a minor input relative to capital and
(2) that labor produces capital anyway. In (2), industry employs labor to
produce the capital, and such investment is the motor of the economic
machine.3' As to the first belief, I believe it is wrong for reasons I have
marshalled elsewhere.32 As to the second, let us treat it now, anticipating
point C. What is the labor-content of capital?
   Let us say farm machines displace farm labor. Looking upstream, we
see labor helping produce the machines. Is capital displacing labor, or is it
merely labor stored in machines displacing onsite labor? We know the
machine needs fuel, and fuel is capital-intensive to produce, but that
doesn't tell us much until we know what "capital-intensive" means, for
refineries too are produced by labor. So let us just focus on the farm
machine. Keeping it simple, we ignore marketing costs between factory
and farm.
  To answer, let us follow one machine through its life. It lasts n years and
yields a service flow worth $1/year. I is the warranted investment to pro-
duce the machine, and equals the present value of the future service flow:
             1 — em
(1)

In equilibrium, as a result of competition, machine costs settle into this
118                                                            LAND USE EFFECTS




              I
relationship to service flows. The cumulated value of the service flow over
n years is $n. The share of investment cost (1) in the total flow is:
          I—=1—e"
(2)
          n         ni
(2) is a decreasing function of n (table 6.4 and figure 6.1).
TABLE 6.4
Investment Cost (1) as a Share of Cumulative Service Flow (n) when i = 8%
               n                            I                           I/n
                5                          3.99                          .80
               10                          6.71                          .67
               20                          9.82                          .49
              40                          11.92                          .30
               80                         12.47                          .16

  Figure 6.1 shows the same information graphically.33
  Now what is labor's share in the service flow? It is no more than I/n—
the rest is interest. I/n is the share when I is 100 percent payroll. More
generally, labor's share is wI/n (w 1), where w is the share of I that is
payroll, plus the share of other costs that trace back to labor in the same
manner.
  If machines are produced at a constant rate, say one a year, there must
be n machines out bearing interest for every work crew making them, so
again the share of labor in the income is a decreasing function of n. It is
not only a decreasing function, it is exactly the same function. This is
shown in appendix 1.
   This simple relation lets us detour all those involved Clark-Böhm-
Bawerk and Knight-Hayek debates and generalize that in a going con-
cern, with replacements balancing retirements, the share of labor in the
flow of service from capital decreases as the life of capital lengthens. A
total economy is a going concern of this kind, better balanced than in-

         $




                                                                      1_eni
              Figure 6.1.—Investment cost (1) and cumulated service flow (n).
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                            119

dividual concerns, and there is negligible error in saying that labor's share
is a decreasing function of the average life of capital.
   Appendix 1 also shows that the share of land rises relative to labor with
life of capital. Labor is applied less frequently to land where labor is em-
bodied in capital of long life.
   There are two kinds of capital: that which is storing up value, and that
which is releasing it in the form of service. The one is appreciating, the
other depreciating, and for short I refer to the one as "growing" and the
other as "flowing" capital.
   The above all refers to flowing capital. The same relationship between
long life and labor's share also obtains with growing capital, only more so.
We follow $1 through the life of a tree it is invested to plant. The tree is cut
after n years and sold for $efli. I is $1. So labor's share is weni, another
decreasing function of n. I omit any table or graph, because growth at
compound interest is so familiar. The share of labor in growing capital is
less than for flowing capital of the same carcass-life. The labor in flowing
capital starts to flow out early on, but that in growing capital is locked in
until the product is ripe, and joined by yet more capital which is not pro-
duced by labor at all but by land and other capital, the invisible inputs.
  With growing as with flowing capital, the basic principle is unaffected
by having a going concern. If we have a normalized forest of n cells or
patches, and cut and regenerate one patch each year, then we must keep n
patches in inventory drawing interest for every one that we put workers on.
As before, the function relating labor's share to life is the same, whether
we look at one patch of trees over life or at one normalized forest over one
year of its life—which is not surprising, considering that the normalized
forest is a cross section of the whole life of one patch of trees, there being
one patch of every age. Knut Wicksell demonstrated this long ago in his
Lectures. The mathematics is in appendix 1, and again there I introduce a
land input. As before, there is less labor per acre when labor is used less
frequently.
   Here are some familiar, recognizable traits of capital-using objects and
enterprises, a sort of Field Guide to Capital Intensity:
1. The payout is deferred, the benefits are strung out, so that the object
   has to yield a large surplus over investment to cover interest. This sur-
   plus is the value-added by capital, the Austrian "agio".
2. The cash flow when it comes is largely income. Recovery and depre-
   ciation are a minor share of cash flow. By the same token, if the object
   is financed, most of the periodic payments are interest for several years.
   The installment needed to retire the debt with interest is not much
   higher than simple interest on the original principal.
120                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

3. Demand is very sensitive to changes in interest rates, as with housing
    and all durable capital. Demand is also sensitive to property taxes.
4. Only a small share of the objects are normally replaced each year.
5. A large share of the objects suffer obsolescence at any given time.
6. If the objects are attached to a site, as the most durable ones are, labor
   is applied onsite in a bulge, a one-shot payroll. There is no fund
   quickly recovered to reinvest to sustain the payroll.
7. The services stored up do not flow through to consumers for a long
   time, so production creates incomes without yielding up the goods to
   match them.
8. The fund-to-flow ratio is high: a large stock per unit volume.
9. Finally, it is fair to say that the owners and other beneficiaries of these
   objects often demand relief from the test of competitive interest rates,
   a test they cannot pass. They also demand special relief from property
   taxes.
  It would be interesting to display examples of the wide range of lives of
familiar assets and goods, from a few minutes for a restaurant meal to
hundreds of years for road cuts and fills. There is a full range of technical
options in most fields. The choice depends on relative input costs, that is,
the cost of labor vs. the rate of interest.
  Just as with the labor/land mix, there is a leverage effect that makes
demand for labor elastic. Where labor is 90 percent of costs, a drop in unit
labor cost to employers raises property income with a nine to one multi-
plier on the percentage change: 1 percent off labor cost adds 9 percent to
property income, drawing new investment into labor-using enterprise in
the most compelling way. Symmetrically, dear labor screens out labor-
using investments, and high interest rates screen out capital-using invest-
ments. This means that dear labor screens out shorter ones, and high
interest longer ones.
   In Figure 6.2 R is ripe value, the value of an object of growing capital
when ripe. The solid curve R =           is the locus of all values of R which
yield i over n years (a straight line on the semilog scale). In equilibrium the
value of all growing capital will rise to touch this locus, at which time it is
ripe. If we discount any value on the curve at i, its present value is unity.
   The two dash lines below the solid one show the effect of discounting at
a higher rate than i. The present value of shorter maturities like n1 falls
less than that of longer ones like n2. At the higher rate, the shorter ma-
turity gains a premium over the longer. Thus the market responds to
scarcity of capital by raising discount rates, which screen out long maturi-
ties in favor of shorter ones.
   This makes sense in the simplest terms when we observe that the cost of
producing the long maturities is mostly interest, that is, value added by
GAFF NE Y: Toward Full Employment                                                   121


Log




                          /
                      /
                  /
              /
          /
      Figure 6.2.—Effect of discount rate on present value, different maturities.


capital. They are prodigal of capital, so naturally a high price of capital
screens them out.
  Leverage may be observed on the graph. The decline in wages needed to
absorb the higher interest rate is slight for short maturities and great for
long ones.
  The two dash lines above the solid one show the reverse effect when we
discount at a lower rate than i. Now n2 is preferred to n1. At the lower rate,
the longer maturity gains a premium over the shorter. Thus the market
solves a glut of capital by letting it be sequestered in long maturities.
  The second adjustment was always the ready answer to the Keynesian
"impasse" over which so many people fretted not long ago, how to find
outlets for surplus capital. Martin Bailey has pointed this out. ' The first
adjustment is the ready answer to our current crisis of capital shortage.
Invest in shorter maturities, deliver the final goods faster to consumers,
recover and reinvest the capital faster in payrolls to use the whole labor
fbrce. That is my thesis in a nutshell.
  Figure 6.3 shows how high labor cost, conversely, screens out shorter
cycles. In the figure, the wage cost of investing in growing capital assets of
different maturities is originally unity in equilibrium. Then it rises by 10
percent to 1.1. On the semilog scale, the investor's rate of return is the
122                                                             LAND USE EFFECTS


   Log R




        1




    Figure 6.3.—Effect of higher wage cost on rates of return, different maturities.




slope of the growth curve. At the higher wage cost shorter maturities like
n are screened out—the return becomes actually negative. Longer ones
like n2 yield higher returns (although not as high as originally).
   Thus high wage costs screen out the short or labor-using investments,
and direct capital into the long or capital-using investments. Given short-
ness of labor, this adjustment would combine capital with less labor and
cure the shortage.
 The models above refer only to growing capital. I omit analogous
models for flowing capital redundant here. The same principles apply.
Mathematically, a unit of growing capital is the building block from which
formulae for flowing capital (like those used for table 6.4) are derived by
summation. So principles that hold for growing capital generally carry
over to flowing capital as well, with a few minor mutatis mutandis.
   The key to full employment then is raising the labor-combining valence
of capital by turning it over faster. Active capital moves labor, while torpid
capital merely occupies land and often displaces more labor than it
employs.
  The key to activating capital in this way is to let labor costs fall and the
cost of capital rise. Conservative economists have long advocated some-
thing like that, of course. Those of more analytical bent have stressed
"Richardo Effect," the substitution of cheaper labor for capital. Labor of
course has resisted that message. They have all, however, failed to observe
that we can lower wage costs without lowering wage rates, or take-home
pay, by abating institutional biases like payroll taxes and withholding
taxes. Likewise, we can raise capital costs without raising interest rates, by
removing income tax loopholes for capital and taxing property more
heavily. Thus one can advocate lowering wage costs and raising capital
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                           123

costs without lining up with the demons in the House of Labor. But
neither does this preclude one from faulting excessive wage demands, even
as the conservatives do. In short, this is not a gut issue pitting "liberals"
against "conservatives" in tired routine combat rituals, but a new issue
calling for some celebration and promising a way out of old dead ends.
   The capital stock of an economy is a great revolving fund. Each time a
unit of it recycles, it combines with workers. To combine the whole great
fund with surplus labor, we need only turn the whole faster. This will de-
liver ripe goods to consumers at a faster rate: growing capital will spend
less time growing before harvest, and flowing capital will spend less time
frozen in cold storage before thawing and flowing. Reinvestment of the
recovered capital will increase incomes with which to buy the augmented
flow of goods and services.
   Here we collide with one of the firmest biases in our cultural impedi-
menta, the bias against rapid replacement. To many people that connotes
waste, shoddiness, flimsiness, the fast buck, speculation, suede shoes,
cultural degradation, demolition of treasured antiquities and cherished
memories, tinsel, planned obsolescence, fly-by-night, throwaways, litter,
and ticky-tacky. That those are indeed only connotations and perversions
of the principle, not the essence, does not placate some people. Long life
to them connotes reliability, stability, soundness, trustworthiness, econ-
omy, character, respect, and old-fashioned goodness. These values lie
deep in the cultural subconscious and will not yield easily. They are indeed
part of what sustains the institutional bias that causes unemployment and
inflation.
   An economist cannot plead against them so well as point to the high
price of indulging them: inflation and unemployment, as well as neglect-
ing the positive values of flexibility, adaptability, early embodiment of
technological advance, reduced capital requirements and easier entry,
replacement of obsolete equipment, stimulus to creativity, mobility, and
evolution. To be sure there are those who oppose change and attribute
modern malaise to future shock, but fifty years ago we lived with cars,
telephones, radios, electric lights, sewers, water works, and elevators,
even as today, and Al Capone too, and it makes more sense to trace the
malaise back to the fear of unemployment and its derivative evils listed
earlier.
   It may help some to note that the "life" of flowing capital, as the term
applies here, is not carcass life but service life. The idea is not to shorten
carcass life, but to speed the delivery of value to consumers, and with it the
recovery of capital invested. If the carcass survives that, well and good, it
is a bonus.
   The purpose in demolishing an old carcass of, say, a house, is to recycle
124                                                   LAND USE EEFECTS

the site it preempts. This offends the preservationist in many people, but
two observations are in order.
   Demolishing old buildings and replacing them with new is a way of pre-
serving more old capital than is demolished, just like replacing a car's
dead battery, or pulling a sick tooth. Surgical demolition is preservation,
in the larger sense. Replace the sick house and preserve the neighborhood;
preserve the neighborhood and preserve the city, with all its capital infra-
structure and all its valuable land.
   Second, the best way to renew many sites is not to demolish but to re-
habilitate. "Rehab" is labor-using, compared to new construction. So is
operating the older buildings: maintenance and operation of buildings
eats up an ever larger share of rent as they age. Shelter from old buildings
is a product of labor more than of capital. Thus, our present tax biases
that favor capital over labor tend towards premature abandonment of old
buildings. The policies, advanced herein are in tune with Jane Jacobs'
image of the good city life. It may seem paradoxical, but reducing wage
costs, which favors investment in capital of shorter service life, at the same
time and by the same token favors extending the carcass life of old capital.
It is quite consistent though, because one recycles the old carcass by
patching it up with investments of shorter life than a wholly new structure
would have, and by using more labor to operate it.
   We have shown now that the value of land to labor depends on how ac-
tively the owner combines it with labor. The value of capital to labor again
depends on the same thing. Combining capital with labor turns out among
other things to mean recycling capital faster. We have shown that the elas-
ticity of demand for labor is high for combining with both land and
capital, owing to the leverage that labor costs exert over returns to land
and capital when the factor mixture is rich on labor. We have shown that
there is a great reserve of land and capital ready to combine with more
labor, in response to small additional incentives. We have hinted at what
such incentives might be. Next we look closer at tax bias against labor.

      B. Tax Inducements to Displace Labor by Land and Capital
  The tax system affords few shelters for the wage or salary earner as
such, directly to him or indirectly to his employer. His income tax is with-
held, beginning fifteen and a half months before the tax is otherwise due.
All his income is "ordinary" and taxed at the full rate. If one has any
question that the income tax is largely a payroll tax he need only try to
remember when he last heard of an oil man taking salaried work as a tax
shelter. Harry Kahn found that labor income rose from 66 percent to 81
percent of the base of the personal income tax, 193963.36
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                         125

  There was a time when income tax enthusiasts argued that it did not
"disincent"37 work because it was a percentage, and your best choice
before tax was the same as that after tax. This neglected the considerable
undeductible costs of working, including loss of welfare, and the rocketing
rise of welfare from 1960 on shows that there is an alternative which, if not
desirable, is preferable to paying taxes on low wages. And in wondering at
the growth of crime, we should recall that tariffs always did beget smug-
glers, and ponder the music-hall wisdom of Fagin: "Better get some un-
taxed income. You've got to pick a pocket or two."
   Those factors, fortified by minimum wage laws, shift some withholding
taxes forward to employers. They in turn, naturally look for substitutes for
labor.
   Besides, of course, employer and employee both pay the O.A.S.I. pay-
roll tax, making labor cost the employer another 10 percent or so more
than the employee gets as incentive to work. The employee's tax is not
deductible, as property taxes are, from taxable income.
   Pension payments are also taken from payroll. If any worker includes
them in his motivational income he has not been watching the C.P.I.
lately. Employer costs are proportional to payroll. Interest earned by
pension funds is tax-deferrable, but that helps the pensioner as a capital-
ist, not as a worker.3 Some pension plan deductions (like those of the
State of Wisconsin) are not tax-deferrable—the worker pays tax on un-
realized income, even though property does not.
   Then there are union dues and other little nicks in the paycheck. Some
are small, but the sum is large, so that it now costs an employer much
more to hire a man than the man ever sees.
   The employee finally gets his take-home residual in cash. To convert
cash to goods, he is taxed once again on retail sales. But many kinds of
property income, like the service flow of one's house, avoid sales taxes.
   Thus the tax system says to employers, hire labor, and government will
charge you in many ways so that your labor cost is much higher than the
worker's real wage. On the other hand, when it comes to holding land, the
tax system is geared to make the burdens light and the rewards great. We
next examine the tax treatment of land.
   The only tax that adds to holding costs is the property tax, the part that
is levied on land value. Even this is relieved by assessment practice. Most
assessors give a good deal of weight, in valuing land, to its improvements
and the gross business conducted there39—that is, the "land" tax becomes
a tax on using land, not holding it. Preferential assessment laws now re-
quire this in many states. A good deal of land is exempt (although hardly
any wage or salary is exempt from income tax). Government land is the
largest exempt class. Much of it is let to private people for inadequate
126                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

fees. Their possessory interests are seldom assessed adequately or at all,
and the low fee structure tells them to waste government land to substitute
for highly taxed labor. Low grazing fees, for example, let stockmen hold
cattle on grass too long, just as low parking rates in cities let parkers hold
scarce street space too long.
  Turning to the income tax, it bears very lightly on land. The basic
abatements for land may be classified and summarized as follows:
1. covert write-off of undepreciated and appreciated land value (as by
   allocating part of it to an old building or orchard on the land)
2. exemption: imputed income (homes, resorts, hobby farms) coupled
   with deduction of interest and property taxes: unrealized appreciation
    (as of advance purchases held until needed); capital gains at death;
   bequests; capital gains of exempt "non-profit" owners
3. deferral of tax on appreciation until realized by sale; expensing of car-
   rying costs (interest and property taxes)
4. capital gains rate on realized appreciation; ordinary offset for carry-
    ing costs and (some) losses
5. deferral of tax beyond date of sale, by several devices
6. deferral of land-use income where there is intertemporal interdepen-
    dence of income (as by planting orchards)
  I have treated some details of these devices elsewhere. ° Some of these
abatements are so gross as to amount to 100 percent exemption from tax,
and some of these, like covert write-off, are repeatable, resulting in actual
subsidies in lieu of taxes for holding land. This is "double-dipping,"
triple- and quadruple-dipping much more serious than what currently
goes by that name.
  While keeping taxes low, government arranges high rewards for land-
owners by building public works, as well as by the whole complex of allied
policies to support and sustain land values. Local works may be charged in
part to local property taxpayers, but there are large federal tax favors
here, too. Local bonds are exempt from federal income tax,4' and are re-
paid from local taxes that are expensible (debt amortization in advance of
economic depreciation should really be capitalized).
  As to sales and excise taxes, they too bear lightly on land. There are
taxes on the transfer of land, but these discourage selling as much as
buying. They have a net impact on the motive to hold land, by gumming
up the market, which adds to the incentive to buy in advance of need (by
destroying the confidence one can buy at time of need). The bulk of sales
taxes, however, fall on the turnover and exchange of goods and services;
on activity, rather than possession. Incomes peculiar to land like ground
rents are not taxed as sales. Capital gains and imputed income also
escape.
GA F F NE y: Toward Full Employment                                      127

   The result of all that is a highly inflated incentive to buy more land than
needed, sooner than needed, and to hang onto it longer than needed. This
in turn results in spreading people and capital out thin over much more
land than needed. And the last, finally, necessitates pumping billions of
dollars of capital into stretched-out roads, pipes, lines, wires, and other
linkages that tie the fragile web of society and economy together. Locali-
ties attract large capital resources to sink into extensions of low productiv-
ity, high risk, and deferred or imagined benefits by mortgaging the tax
power to general obligation bonds. State and federal governments pour in
additional capital, as by the highway trust fund. None of this public
capital is subject to any property tax, and he would be an eccentric public
accountant who added a shadow tax to the capital to show its real social
cost.
  But Aha! one might say (had he skipped too fast over the previous
section), these inflated infrastructure needs are all investment opportuni-
ties, exactly what Dr. Keynes ordered. We can always open up more new
land, too, by extending lines out into the great open spaces and urbanizing
them, and reclaiming the deserts if needed to replace the farms. So much
for your limits of the Earth!
   In fact, capital in marginal line extensions creates fewer sustainable
jobs per million sunk than it would if invested in almost any other way—as
it would have been if not taken for this use. There is a one-shot payroll
only. After that, the value added by the facilities is added mainly by the
unrecovered capital and land, as has been shown in section A, and the
factor input is mainly capital measured by interest, the hire of unrecov-
ered capital. The capital per job is uncommonly, inordinately high above
the mean.
   The money spent recycles, to be sure, but that is no blessing in these
inflationary times The fund of real capital stops revolving; active capital is
converted to torpid. Ripe goods are not delivered to consumers, and the
investor does not recover his capital to reinvest. The real capital advanced
to workers now lies buried in the ground, unavailable to meet money de-
mand in the next round of consumption. The policy only makes sense on
the premise built into modern macroeconomics that there is a bottomless
cornucopia of latent capital formation waiting for demand, and inflation
is a remote danger. That premise has proven contrary to fact. These
macroeconomics are pursued below in section C.
   In addition to tax-induced waste of "land" in the narrow sense, there is
the same for minerals. The set of tax subsidies to hype up minerals ex-
ploration and production are by now well known, and I merely remind you
of the depletion allowance based on a value whose accrual was never taxed
as income, use of wellhead value rather than in situ value as the base of the
allowance, expensing of dry holes and intangibles, and capital gains treat-
128                                                     LAND USE EFFECTS

ment. When it comes to extracting foreign resources there are the foreign
tax credit, tax exemption of ocean shipping, transfer of profit to lowest tax
jurisdiction, tax deferral on unrepatriated profits, and the like.
   As to the property tax, assessment is at its lowest when it comes to min-
erals.42 There is negligible property tax pressure to utilize domestic min-
erals, nothing at all comparable to the income tax incentives to go after
foreign minerals.
   The results of the complex of tax measures are of course complex, and
as Alfred Kahn has shown, they must be interpreted in terms of the cartel-
ized industries,43 and to this we should add other institutional biases, like
the establishment of tenure through exploration44 and military pressure.45
But the broad results are analogous to those for other land. We spread
ourselves too thin by overstimulating foreign production relative to domes-
tic, and overstimulating exploration and capture relative to production
and conservation. We thus involve enormous extra outlays for pipelines
and infrastructure, and, the foreign investments involve even greater out-
lays for military support. Military outlays may be regarded much like the
extension of a municipal service such as police protection to new suburbs.
The mercantilist metropolis makes the world its suburb. Like other out-
lays, these tie down capital until the flow of benefits returns the costs. It is
symptomatic of the capital intensity of military outlays, if not definitive,
that interest on the national debt about equals the armed forces payroll
(about $25 billion each). As the debt is rolled over its cost can only go up.
   There is a Georgist impulse to think of "production" as always good.
But extracting more primary products with a high natural resource con-
tent, like oil or aluminum, is the substitution of land for labor, just as
much as is spreading labor thin over farm land. In addition, lavish use of
materials and energy for labor is the prime source of pollution and gen-
eration of residuals, both of which in turn require space and drive away
people.
  Thus in respect to minerals, as with other land, the tax system induces
the use of too much, and requires large capital outlays to do it.46
   Next we look at the tax treatment of capital. The property tax hits some
kinds of capital, and rather hard. But public capital, as noted already, is
exempt, and affords a wide avenue of escape.
   Much other capital is also exempt, or given preferential low assessment.
Timber makes a good example. Timber is almost everywhere under-
assessed by custom or law. The argument is that the investment would not
pay if taxed, because of its long life—that is, its heavy use of capital. Yet
when is the payroll tax or income tax abated because a labor-using busi-
ness cannot survive it?
  Preferential treatment of timber is granted in almost as many ways as
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                          0
                                                                         129

there are states. Ellis Williams has summarized these as exemption or
rebate, modified assessment, modified rate, deferred payment, yield tax,
and severance tax.47 These preferences are granted on top of rural tax
rates, which are low anyway: around 1 percent of market value. Sylvan
rates are even lower, because of the low complement of workers, and
hence population, relative to inventories of timber. In some areas—north-
ern Maine is an extreme case—voters are systematically excluded, pre-
venting incorporation of local government and holding down the tax rates
near zero by separating the people from the tax base. We hear a lot about
tax enclaves for industrial plants, but most of the nation's timber capital is
in tax enclaves too.
   The "modified assessment" listed by Williams is often customary even
where not formalized by law. Saplings are overlooked routinely until they
approach merchantable age, even though they have a market value for in-
vestment. Assessments habitually lag behind the times, a built-in advan-
tage for growing capital over flowing (depreciating) capital. Williams has
published a collection of state assessment manuals that show unmistake-
able special standards of solicitude for timber.48 The Washington State
manual, for example, specifies that sale prices of land with timber do not
measure fair value because they do not take account of carrying costs to
harvest. "Assess it low" is the message.
   De facto exemption of premerchantable timber is of greater value on
slower-growing timber, because it goes through a longer premerchantable
life.
   A good deal of other capital is exempt too. Anything on legs or wheels or
water is hard to catch on assessment day, as are consumer durables, and
most jurisdictions have stopped trying. But business inventories, which
are short lived, are hit hard.
   Buildings, which are durable and capital-using, are hit hard too. This
would seem to constitute a bias against use of capital, and it certainly is a
bias against improving land. But the effect on the individual building is
reversed because the property tax is levied locally, and local governments
use zoning and other controls to protect and fortify their tax bases. The
thrust of local zoning, building codes, subdivision controls, occupancy
limits, condemnation power, and "sewer power" is to raise the capital
requirements of residing in a town. The net result is doubly bad. We get
more sprawl, raising infrastructure capital needs, and more capital per
dwelling unit on the land that is used.
  Turning to the income tax, it contains many loopholes and abatements
for capital, and these generally are geared to favor capital of longer life. I
will itemize basic classes of preferences for flowing and growing capital,
beginning with flowing.
130                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

   1. Fast write-off and expensing. Whenever one writes off an asset faster
than it actually depreciates he lowers the effective tax rate below the nom-
inal rate.49 Expensing is best of all, of course, being the fastest, and it
lowers the effective rate to zero. It means the treasury puts up in year one a
share of the capital investment equal to the tax rate, and thereafter gets
only a return on its own investment.
   Some important capital outlays which the Congress lets be expensed are
costs of minerals exploration, intangible drilling costs, R & D, advertis-
ing, rearing breeding livestock, starting orchards, soil and water conser-
vation,5° many costs of land development,5' interest and property taxes
incurred to carry growing capital, losses incurred to create goodwill or
appropriate resources allocated by user rights (like air routes or water
rights), any investment of unrepatriated profits abroad, price war losses
incurred tocapture markets, movie-making,52 and so on. One can see
from the list that expensing is granted more freely to growing than flowing
capital. Growing capital is the kind that ties up capital longer before any
is recovered.
   It is a constant theme of interest groups both private and public that
profits are not profits but costs if reinvested in the same business in which
earned, and strange as it seems to an economist there is a ready audience
for this fallacy.
   Almost all income-yielding capital is fully tax-depreciable well before its
service life is over. About the only kind depreciated slowly is that of regu-
lated utilities, to maintain the rate base and pass through the higher taxes
to consumers.
   2. There is double-dipping allowed when capital is sold and redepre-
ciated. The excess of sale price over book value is taxed as capital gains, to
"recapture" the excess depreciation, but recapture is several years after
write-off and at the lower capital-gain rate. The longer capital lasts, the
more dips are possible. Buildings are the main beneficiary. Besides their
long life they have the advantage of being confusable with land, and a
good deal of land value is written off normally with each dip, even though
the land value is rising.
   "Recapture" of excess write-off is based on a sliding scale, the lower
rates applying the longer the capital is held. This helps limit the number
of dips, but adds to the favoritism shown to longer-lived capital.
   3. Consumer capital in houses and hobbies yields a tax-free imputed
income, just as land does, coupled with deduction of interest and property
taxes and indefinite deferral of capital gains taxes. If I am solvent and
never move to a cheaper house I can defer the gains until fiscal extreme
unction, forgiveness at death. The capital gain may derive mainly from the
land, but to claim the land as residential I must have a house.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                         131

   If I hire workers to build or improve my house, that is not deductible. If
I pay out for repairs and upkeep, that is not deductible. The exemption is
to the return on capital, the service flow in excess of cost. The more
durable and capital-using the house, the greater share of the service flow
that is. A cheap house or trailer, a shelter of low capital requirements,
benefits little from this exemption., The benefit is to capital.
  Here we meet an exception to the rule of no loopholes for labor. Labor
on one's own house is tax free. There is even some inverse relationship
between the capital in shelter and the labor input required to keep it
going. On the other hand, the opportunity for tax free labor requires that
one own a house, and the more land around a house the more the oppor-
tunity. The greatest outlet for home labor is when combined with land and
capital.53 A material share of the value of country estates and farms
doubtless derives from their outlet for tax-free labor. The farther one gets
from the exchange economy of cities and the nearer to self-sufficiency, the
more labor is tax free.
   In addition, it is the relatively wealthy who can afford to keep wives at
home who do not work for cash. The tax-free labor of housewives is a
bonus for the leisure class, of much less value to the waitress, seamstress,
scrubwoman, and maid, who labor in the houses of others.
   The income tax is a tax on sale and exchange of labor rather than on
home labor—a critic might say on social behavior rather than narcissism.
But on larger landholdings there is room to reap the benefits of specializa-
tion, cooperation, exchange, and society and still avoid taxes, by internal
barter. In the later days of the Roman Empire patrocinium became
common, evolving into the early feudal system. The overtaxed citizen com-
mended himself to be a "client" of the large landowner "patron" to escape
the heavy hand of the publican.54 Today on large paternalistic ranches we
see the same forces in a less-aggravated stage, and in tax-free religious
brotherhoods of Hutterites and Mennonites the modern counterparts of
old ecclesiastical benefices. There are many reasons why Houthakker
found the farms of Texas to report no net taxable income whatever, but
one reason is the outlet they offer for tax-free exchange of labor.
  Thus the tax loophole for labor is open mainly to those owning land and
capital. This narrows the loophole so that it hardly compares in scope with
the exemption of imputed income of owned land and captial. The landless
proletarian seeking tax relief has to resort to welfare and crime.
  For sentimental reasons, tax benefits to homeowners are popular, along
with many other subsidies, like cheap credit pumped in via the Federal
Home Loan Bank Board and the host of predecessor and ancillary
agencies. In result, capital is diverted from commerce and industry (the
taxpaying branches at least) to homes. Yet capital in homes complements
132                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

labor less than capital in offices, stores, factories, inventories, and so on.
It makes no work places, it needs no processing, and it lasts much longer.
  4. Deduction of interest and property tax. These costs of carrying
capital are fully deductible from ordinary income, even though the income
from capital is wholly or partly exempt from tax.
   5. Investment tax credit. This on-again off-again device lets investors in
many kinds of capital reduce their taxes by 7 percent of the investment.
After that, one may depreciate the whole amount as well. This device has
the potential of favoring shorter over longer investments. In form it is a
premium on replacement, and thus labor-intensiveness. It could be a
powerful device for quickly causing capital to combine with more labor.
But Congress has forestalled this by permitting the credit only on a sliding
scale favoring longer investments. The credit is not fully allowable for
investments whose estimated economic life falls short of eight years. The
net result is a lower overall tax rate on capital than on labor.

  Those five abatements of course move investors to prefer capital-using
over labor-using techniques, and combine more capital per worker in all
processes.
  In addition, the abatements are biased among forms of capital,
consistently favoring those lasting longer. Capital cycling in less than a
year is treated very harshly. It hardly achieves the status of "capital,"
indeed, in the eyes of the law. Economists have strung along, letting
"investment" refer to buying capital to last longer than a year and appear-
ing quite unconcerned over the logical, definitional, and modeling
problem in drawing so arbitrary a line between "investment" and
consumption spending.
  The investor who recovers capital inside the year reports his costs and
revenues on the same tax return, even though they may be nearly a year
apart. He might gain by straddling the year ends, but the I.R.S., so
careless with intertemporal advantages gained by owners of durables, is
vigilant to this and forbids him to deduct the cost of goods not sold.55 The
effect is the same as requiring that increased inventories be reported as
income. The Treasury will not help anyone finance working capital as it
does durable capital. Eisner v. Macomber, the 1920 case which protects
land, timber, mineral reserves, stocks, etc. from taxes on unrealized
gains, does not apply to accumulation of inventory. The rules are bent
against goods of higher labor content.
  There is a concession to phantom inflationary inventory profits in LIFO
accounting, but "very complex rules are involved and . . . LIFO is not
ordinarily used by small business                 It is tailored for larger
business—the ones that need more capital per worker.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                             133

  As noted before, recapture of excess depreciation is taxed on a sliding
scale, the rate declining with years held—another favor to long life.
  Improvements to land that add to sale value receive capital gains treat-
ment, with all the many favors that implies. Unlike the cost of inventories,
which is not deductible until sale of goods, these costs are often expensible
and nearly always depreciable long before sale. Land improvements of
course are more durable than inventories.
  Depreciable lives are generally based on arbitrary class of asset, regard-
less of actual service life. The more the service life exceeds the write-off life
the lower is the effective tax rate, a clear tax incentive to build in more
durability. Depreciation paths are also important. Straight-line tax
depreciation is most common, but shorter lived assets like, say, a delivery
truck, depreciate like the Blue Book value of cars, faster than straight
line. They get the tougher break. Buildings, on the other hand, depreciate
slowly at first, along a path like the declining balance of an installment
debt. But the I.R.S. allows them accelerated depreciation (double-declin-
ing balance and sum-of-the-years'-digits.)
   Thus there is a consistent and pervasive tax bias in favor of capital, and
 among capital assets in favor of the longer-lived. That this is so consistent,
 and often explicit,57 points to some sort of conscious intent, or systematic
 bias.

  The above referred to flowing capital. Growing capital, which on the
whole ties up capital longer, and admixes more interest input with the
original labor input than does flowing capital, is treated even better.
   The basic tax subsidy to growing capital is deferral of tax to date of sale.
Income, in the meaningful definition of Haig and Simons, occurs when
value accrues, that is, each year as the value grows. Thus growing capital
is taxed after the income accrues, and the longer the wait, the greater the
benefit. A mathematical proof is in appendix 2. In effect, by deferring
taxes, the Treasury helps finance growing capital (except ordinary inven-
tories of short life).
  Associated with that is a higher propensity of Congress to allow
expensing of the capital cost of growing than flowing capital. Agriculture
makes a good example.58 Under the cash-accounting privilege allowed to
farm business, a "farmer" can deduct expenses of materials and services
that "actually go into or are a part of a final salable product—such as
feed, seed, stud fees, and management services." Machinery and building
improvements have to be capitalized—they are flowing capital. Capital
that falls in a twilight zone between the classes includes costs of raising
livestock held for draft, breeding, or dairy purposes, and costs of starting
up orchards and vineyards. These too are expensible, even though some
134                                                  LAND USE EFFECTS

orchards may bear for eighty years. Breeding stock may be depreciated as
well—another case of double-dipping—and their sale not be taxed until the
"herd" is liquidated, an incredible package of special privilege59 for the
kind of livestock that requires the most land and capital per dollar of value
added, to say nothing of per unit of nutritive value.
   Some large classes of growing capital are timber, livestock, minerals
(the portion of their value added by discovery and development), some
kinds of knowledge, orchards and vineyards (for part of their lives), and
liquors. Most inventories are growing capital, but the bulk of them turn
over within a year and enjoy no tax subsidy. Most of those listed are
greatly favored, however.6°
  As Dangerfield points out, the investor will "maximize his tax shelter
assets . . . while minimizing his nonshelter assets, such as machinery or
buildings." That is, he substitutes growing capital like cattle for flowing
capital.
  Again we take timber as an example. Although the tax is deferred until
sale, the capital costs of timber, interest and property taxes, are
expensable as you go. On the other hand, the cost of labor used to reforest
bare land is not an expense; it must be capitalized and not deducted until
sale.
  In addition, timber sales get capital gains treatment, although the
interest and property taxes are expensed from ordinary income. The labor
cost which had to be carried forward to sale is now deducted only from the
capital gain.
   Ordinary profit from vertically integrated downstream mills may be
shifted to timber and get capital gains rates by the firm's nudging up
shadow transfer prices. The I.R.S. watches these prices with some
diligence, and it is not certain that fictional internal prices get by. But
there is every incentive to raise nonfictional transfer prices by letting
timber add more value on the stump at capital gains rates before becom-
ing a log, processed by labor at ordinary rates. In the mills, value added by
labor is taxed at ordinary rates, and so is the value added by profit.
   Some of the gains subject to tax are illusory results of inflation, and on
this basis one might think tax preferences are needed merely to prevent
higher effective rates on growth of capital. The undeducted cost basis of
ripe timber is however negligible, in any case, next to its merchantable
value, so this doesn't amount to much. Carrying costs have been expensed
right along. And in general, inflation adds to motives to hold real assets,
for these reasons:
1. Inflation of property values has outpaced wage rates. The illusion
   would be to overlook that wealth holders as a class have gained on
   tenants, young people, pensioners, and depositors.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                           135

2. Inflation is an annual tax on holding money. Taxing the rise of equity
    values merely redresses the balance, and fails in that by a wide margin,
    because the inflationary loss is immediate, while the gains tax is de-
    ferred. Inflation hurts the most those whose need for liquidity is high
    relative to their real assets. These are those whose volume is high rela-
    tive to their capital, because liquidity needs vary with volume. That is,
    these are those whose capital turns over fast. Lampman's study of the
    concentration of wealth found that money and near-money as a share
    of wealth declines with total wealth, so that inflation as a tax has a re-
    gressive quality compared to taxes on real wealth.
3. Inflation lowers the real cost of borrowing. Since small savers have few
    alternatives, and the Fed prevents competition from raising rates and
    some of this benefit is passed through to borrowers, and owners of real
    wealth are the major borrowers, and leverage is the name of the game,
    inflation has advanced them capital at very low real rates of interest,
    another subsidy to holding capital.
4. In terms of bias between long and short (lived) capital, gains on short-
    lived capital are equally the product of money illusion but are taxed
    sooner, and at ordinary rates.
  A major compaign is underway to abate the taxation of "phantom
profits," articulated by Joel Barlow, Norman Ture, Henry Wallich,
George Terborgh, and others. Their proposals are to index cost bases,
resulting in larger depreciation write-offs over time. This strikes me as a
one-sided and unbalanced view, which overlooks points 1-4 made here.
Appendix 4 shows how inflation on balance favors the longer-lived assets.
Indexing would only worsen this bias.6'
   Turning to the corporate income tax, it is biased against income from
corporate property by double-taxing it, or so it would seem. Yet the cor-
porate form is so useful a device for sheltering property income, regard-
less, that some wealthy people set up personal corporations for tax
avoidance. This calls for a second look.
  The point is to avoid the double tax by not taking cash out for a long
time, converting ordinary income into capital gains, forgivable at death.
Public corporations, too, are moved to plow back profits. This puts more
capital each year back in the control of corporate managers to reinvest,
whether or not they have any good ideas. The capital does not have to meet
the test of the market; it is free of all cost but the range of opportunities of
the particular management. Thus the net impact of the tax system is to
make internal capital artificially cheap to corporations, and push them
into ventures of deferred payoffs.
   In addition, of course, they avoid double taxation by financing with
debt, and their collateral security rises in step with their retention of earn-
136                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

ings. They also finance internally from pension funds, now totalling $170
billion, the income free of income tax.62 Borrowing requires collateral,
and law and custom favor solid, durable capital as the thing to pledge.
   As to excise taxes, their impact is like that of income taxes, only more
so, because costs are not deductible. Excise taxes in effect tax capital each
time it turns over. The busy merchant who turns his capital several times a
year is taxed on it as many times. But the same capital in a tree is taxed
only once at the end of eighty years or so.
   If tax bias were the only institution to favor wealth over labor, we could
say it may offset other biases, but in fact there are reinforcing biases,
which I will merely list: subsidized low-interest loans; regulatory bias and
Averch-Johnson effect; licensing laws which dispose of resources,
franchises, monopolies, etc. subject to heavy capital requirements; use of
low interest rates in planning public works; ignoring opportunity costs of
public land; logrolling, overcommitment, and resulting stretchout of
public works; the Highway Trust Fund; the failure to provide any police or
administrator-enforced abatement of pollution, leaving the citizen no
recourse but the larger lot, farther out; and the price-umbrella effect that
builds excess capacity into cartels. There are more, and I know of no
comparable set of biases favoring inputs of labor.

          C. Demand for Capital Is Not Enough to Make Jobs,
               because Capital Can Substitute for Labor
  We have already laid the basis of the present argument and recapitulate
briefly before moving into the macroeconomics.
   If there were no capital, the way to make jobs would be clear and
simple. We would tax land value as the property tax does, as a regular
fixed payment based on value, not varying with use. This would put
pressure on owners to intensify. We would not tax them for hiring labor
and selling products. They would use more labor on less land and solve
our problem. And this is still a big part of any solution, regardless of
capital. We must use more workers per acre.
   Since there is capital, the problem has a third dimension. We need to
use more workers per acre, and also do it more often. The form of capital
we create affects both relations—that is, how many and how often.
   Just now, with capital short and land dear, we not only need to use less
land per worker, we also need to use less capital per worker. It is not that
more capital would not be good if we had it. Voluntary saving is splendid,
and taxing land will doubtless encourage it by lowering the value of that
asset and prompting people to fill the void with real capital formation. But
at any time, we want to make do with what there is, and just now we need
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                         137

to make a short supply go around much further. The market will do it for
us if we let it.
   Investments differ widely in "valence" for labor, how much labor they
mix with capital. So investments which take capital from job-creating uses
of high labor valence to sink it into other uses of low labor valence are not
helping make jobs. Unrepatriated capital overseas is not making jobs in
America, except as Americans emigrate with it. Some capital like cattle
has a high valence for land and deprives labor of land, as well as of capital
in other forms. Some capital, like that in a giant strip-mine excavator,
combines one operator with millions in capital and land, and hardly com-
pares with one sewing machine, which also requires one operator and a
few square feet of floor space.
   But our ideologies tell us we should subsidize investment to employ
labor, and untax capital, and finance tax-exempt public works, and so on.
They tell us that labor produces capital anyway, so how can capital
displace labor? In effect they tell us that if capital does not always
combine well with labor in parallel, it still combines in series, and so the
key to jobs is investment. And here they lead us into folly.
  We see investment in, let us say, a large storage dam as using workers,
but not as freezing up scarce capital. We see the dam produced by
workers, but we overlook the service flow from the dam produced by the
invisible capital input, that is, interest on the unrecovered principal over
life, which accounts for and soaks up most of the cash flow. We see the
demand for construction labor and think it is a net increase, but forget
that the financing takes funds and thus real capital from alternative uses.
We know that construction payrolls don't last, but we think that this is
merely a local problem balanced out in aggregate social accounting: but in
fact it shows exactly what heavy construction does to the aggregate
economy. Each dollar frozen in concrete contributes to shortage of capital
reinvestment and reemployment. We pay bread today for stones tomorrow.
   It might be thought that I am overemphasizing the life of capital and
should consider that capital combines not just with labor that produces it,
but also with labor that works with it. Thus a factory "makes jobs."
However, the factory produces goods too, which are capital of some life. If
we think of an economic matrix in which we match all capital with the
labor that produces it, then we have a comprehensive tableau. Further
matching would be redundant and might double-count. That is, we can
measure factor proportions by vertical integration, as I am doing; or alter-
natively by horizontal integration, as in a normalized model; but not by
both at once.
   We think that "intensive land use" must be good for labor, but forget
that trees and livestock and farm machines and fully automated plants
138                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

and the blank sterile walls of many modern city buildings drive labor off
the land and last too long to hire reconstruction labor very often.
Appendix 3 shows a mathemetical formula for the exact relation of labor-
intensity and capital-intensity of land use. Long life of capital can mean
high intensity of land use without much labor.
  The problem is that to encourage investment we lower the cost of
capital, and move investors to use it lavishly in place of taxable labor. We
forget that the job-creating efficiency of capital varies from one use to
another, and our measures to promote investing lead capital into the least
job-creating uses, where capital substitutes for labor, because we make
capital look cheap and labor look dear.

          D. Factor Substitution and Replacement Demand:
        The Microeconomic Basis for a Correct Macroeconomics
  The great, the overriding fault of modern macroeconomics is its
homogenized treatment of investments. One is as good as another; only
the aggregate matters in the New Economics.
   We must distinguish among investments. Adam Smith, as so often,
gave us a morning star of light on the subject. Smith said, "The quantity
of that labor, which equal capitals are capable of putting in motion, varies
extremely according to. . . their employment . . . A capital . . . employed
in the home trade will sometimes make 12 operations, or be sent out and
returned 12 times, before a capital employed in the foreign trade of
consumption has made one . . . the one will give four and twenty times
more encouragement and support to the industry of the country than the
other."63
  Mill was like-minded. He and Smith saw "circulating" capital as
"setting labor in motion," and "fixed" capital as not.
  Mill said, "capital may be temporarily unemployed, as in the case of
unsold goods . . . during this interval it does not set in motion any indus-
try. . . capital may be so employed as not to support laborers, being fixed
in machinery, buildings, improvement of the land and the like. .
Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by preservation, but by
perpetual reproduction. . . . To set free a capital which would otherwise be
locked up in a form useless for the support of labor, is, no doubt, the same
thing to the interests of laborers as the creation of a new capital . . . all
increase of fixed capital, then taking place at the expense of circulating,
must be, at least temporarily, prejudicial to the interests of laborers. . .
Suppose. .. a capital of 2,000. . . half. . . effects a permanent improve-
ment. . . . He (the capitalist) will employ, in the next and each following
year, only half the number of laborers."64
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                        139

  Unfortunately Smith and Mill never got the bugs out of their wages-
fund theory, which never became fully coherent and operative. In spite of
the above quotations, it seemed to some that the "fund" could not
increase except by slow increments of capital formation. Knut Wicksell
corrected this: ". . . a true view of the famous wage-fund theory. . . -
Capital in its free form is employed to advance both wages and rent. . . -
If. . . a given capital. . . is employed year after year. . - then each year
about an equal part of that capital will be set free. That part . - . con-
stitutes the whole production of finished commodities and services (of
capital) of the year. When the capitalist class has taken the surplus . - . it
must, in order to maintain its capital, reinvest the remainder—which it
does by hiring labor and land for new production. This part, therefore,
is. . . the annual wage-fund... . The wage-fund may undergo consider-
able changes, in so far as the average period of turnover of capital is
lengthened or shortened. . . it is only the part (of capital) annually set free
which can purchase labor (or land)."65
   "It is only the part of capital annually set free which can purchase labor
(or land). Here I think we have the basis for a correct macroeconomics,
one that can exorcise the fallacy that investment of any kind adds to real
demand for labor merely by recycling money. The only kind of investing
that purchases labor truly, without the fraud of inflation, is investing
which corresponds to delivery of real goods to consumers at the end of the
pipeline. These real goods are the "capital set free which can purchase
labor." This is what turns paper money into real money.
   This device suddenly ties together micro- and macro-economics nicely.
The way to use more workers with capital is to turn and recover the capital
faster. And this is also the way to increase aggregate demand for labor. By
far the bulk of the gross investment that generates payrolls has its source
in the recovery of capital by sale of ripe goods and the services of flowing
capital to consumers. Recovery and reinvestment of capital are the prime
movers of the economic machine.
   Wicksell saw capital soaking up any surplus labor. "If. . . more labor is
 available than can be employed. . . a shorter period of production . . . is
 adopted, and the capital which was before insufficient is now able to give
employment to all workers.            He saw social capital as a wage fund,
but a fund which can sustain any rate of flow because it revolves. This
Great Revolving Fund does not limit wages. By recycling faster it employs
 more workers up to any needed number, and it speeds up when stimulated
by lower wage rates and higher interest. In the idiom of modern
macroeconomics, this increases replacement demand. Aggregate demand
can fall short of full employment if capital turns slowly, but quicker
replacement corrects things and fills the gap. Thus, ". . . the existing
140                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

capital must just suffice to employ the existing number of workers.
The greater replacement demand is financed by greater capital recovery,
and matched by a greater flow of finished goods, so it is not diluted by
inflation.
  Let us look at Wicksell's device68 as a way of meeting the national
payroll with a small capital. He was telling us in effect that the economy
can do what the small businessman has to do all the time. He has to
recover his capital quickly each time he sinks it, if he is to meet the next
payroll without dropping workers.
   Consider a baker on a busy corner open 365 days a year, with working
capital of $200. To keep it simple, assume payments are made daily, and
they spend the first day setting up, making no sales, but sinking the $200.
Half goes for payroll, half for feed-stock, and we'll ignore overhead for
simplicity. Thereafter they sell out each night. The $100 turning daily
finances annual payroll of $36,500, and an equal flow of net production
above cost. To this he need add only $10 for 10 percent interest on $100 of
his working capital.
   If it took two days instead of one to sell out, he would have to find
another $200 of working capital, or drop half his bakers.
   As a rough rule, the flow (F) you can handle equals your capital (K)
times turnover (1). The average payout period (F) is the reciprocal of
turnover:

(3)

You must hold down that payout period by scheduling your sales so that
your cash flow balances your outgo before you run out of capital. If K = 6F
(still assuming daily payments) you must sell the first cohort of goods out in
six days, or fail to meet payroll no. 7.
  As you get into financing slower inventories, compound interest adds to
your capital required and K > FP. If your period is seven years,69 then
compound interest at 10 percent doubles the value of each item by the
time it is sold. At this time your capital will be ten times your flow, rather
than seven times, because the cumulative value of an annuity of one
equals ten. 10 percent interest on ten equals one. The memorable thing
about this period is that your annual interest bill now equals all your other
costs, and takes half your cash flow.70
  Meantime, your capital has virtually stopped sustaining any payroll.
Instead of being 1/365 of volume, capital is now 10 times volume, or 3,650
times as much per job.
  The demand for labor does not depend primarily on the amount of
capital, then, but on how fast it turns over—how active it is. Each time
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          141

capital cycles, it combines with and activates labor: Every investment in
payroll creates labor income equal to capital on the first round. But for
sustained impact it must keep recycling. Paybacks deferred are payrolls
denied.
   If you recover capital slowly, you constantly need more money, until you
reach an equilibrium with cash flow balancing outflow—which by this
time includes very large interest payments on all the unrecovered capital.
   Some firms and agencies have gone on for decades without reaching
that balance. The Bell Telephone Company is notable. In 1971 it went to
the market for $4.5 billion in outside capital, about 20 percent of all the
new capital raised from stocks and bonds by American industry.7' "But it
will take another 30 years, according to Bell's plans, for electronics switch-
ing systems to displace the older (electro-mechanical) equipment in the
telephone network.""
   The United States Bureau of Reclamation makes another case. In 1902
Congress endowed the new bureau with the Revolving Fund, to be re-
couped and reused every ten years. By now it was to have completed eight
cycles, and might have, except for one problem: it has yet to complete the
first. Each new project has drained capital from elsewhere—and frozen
much of it tight. Instead of activating much labor, the bureau has de-
activated much capital. In the process it has also frozen scarce waters in
farm uses in areas where that use is seriously obsolete, so the capital is a
public nuisance.
   Many companies invest in excess of depreciation. A company can do
that—by tapping others. An economy cannot, except by new saving. It is a
closed system with a zero sum of capital transfers. To meet the national
payroll the economy must deliver the goods, or cut the payroll. The na-
tional capital is indeed a Great Revolving Fund. The fund receives inputs
from labor and delivers to consumers. Labor and consumption set limits
on the throughput, as we know. But so does turnover of the fund—and
that has been neglected.
   Meeting the national payroll has two sides: spending money for work,
and delivering real goods to back up the money. Turnover generally bal-
ances the two sides nicely. Replacement anticipates liquidation. The keep-
ers of the fund—capitalists—anticipate the maturity and sale of their
goods, and pay workers to replace them. This gives workers the income to
buy the ripe goods. (Along with turnover there are net saving and invest-
ment, but these are small next to turnover—too small a tail to wag so big a
dog, as the New Economics would have it.)
   The New Economics takes care only of the spending side, the money
payroll. Its fault is to assume that delivering the goods then takes care of
itself. Turnover is assumed mutable, totally accommodating in response
142                                                  LAND USE EFFECTS

to the touch of spending. The fact is that turnover itself determines spend-
ing, since replacement anticipates liquidation. And turnover has become a
bottleneck. The flow of income cannot exceed K. T, capital times turnover
(plus direct services).
   The New Economics cannot address this problem any better than the
guns of Singapore, facing out to sea, could turn around to meet the Japa-
nese attacking by land. "Think Spending" is its motif, and discourage
deliveries. This is to meet the fundamental macroeconomic problems of
underconsumption, oversaving, underinvesting, and liquidity preference.
If the problem is perceived as how to remove surplus goods from the
market, the doctrines and policies that result will welcome investments
with only deferred benefits. These create money incomes and no consumer
goods. The result has to be inflation, and has been for many years.
  New Economists have mocked Say's Law and taught two generations
that supply does not create its own demand. Today's problem seems to be
that demand does not create the answering supply. Merely spending
money is cheap, and easy to arrange when you have your hands on the
levers that control money supply and government debt. Delivering real
goods is harder.
   Smith and Mill sound quaint today when they say the office of capital is
to advance subsistence to labor. We should have more such quaintness,
rather than doctrines which would advance money to labor without sub-
sistence to back it up, so that it shrinks in your hand. We have traded on
the symbol and denied the substance until the symbol has lost its power to
command.
   The New Economics does not omit turnover from its equations. Rather
it buries and obscures it by keeping it implicit. This occurs when one
treats "consumption" as an income-creating expenditure. Now really,
consumer spending as such does not create much income; it takes off the
shelf goods already produced. Replacement is the spending that creates
income. There is disinvestment and reinvestment. In macroeconomic logic
these two transactions are netted out, so consumption creates income, and
only the uncleared balance shows up as net investment—which is what
"investment" means in modern macroeconomic logic.73 The great mass of
gross investment is called consumption. The turnover of capital required
is assumed to occur passively, automatically, accommodatingly.
   Only it doesn't. Turnover has its own set of determinants, including the
tax biases we have surveyed. Furthermore, since replacement anticipates
liquidation, and the time for liquidation depends largely on the physical
character of the capital in question, turnover plays a strong role in deter-
mining income and consumer spending, rather than the other way
around. It is the pacer, not the paced. Consumer spending is the result,
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          143

not just the cause of the ripeness and sale of goods. It is this that keeps
balance between aggregate demand and supply.
   This is the missing link in the New Economics, enmeshed in its doc-
trine of consumer determinism. It is replacement, mainly, that determines
gross investment which generates most income. Replacement in turn is
determined by the schedule of maturity of capital in being.
   This analysis would seem to explain better than orthodox New Eco-
nomics our current predicament. Here, replacement spending falls short
because of a shortage of ripe goods, not asurplus. If there are not enough
jobs to go around it results from too few goods flowing out the pipeline,
not too many. A shortage of ripe goods requires that they be rationed, and
unemployment is the rationing agent. If there is not enough consumption
to employ all workers, it is because there is too little to consume. It sounds
very much like Stagflation.
   What's happening is that turnover is too slow. A lot of good capital is
simply wasted and lost forever too, which is worse in the long run but not
very different in the short from freezing it up for twenty years. This means
slow delivery of final goods, and slow recovery of capital to reinvest.
   Reinvestment demand is not inflationary, because it anticipates or ac-
companies delivery of real goods. Lacking adequate reinvestment, modern
macroeconomic policy seeks to simulate real demand by creating and
recycling money faster. But the policy-makers have omitted the second
half of meeting the national payroll. They are feeding out paper but not
delivering the goods.
  How can capital be short when there is so much, and you can buy it so
cheap on Wall Street now? Easy. There is plenty of capital stuck in the
ground. The shortness is of readily recoverable capital for reinvestment.
The shortness raises discount rates and devalues common stock, but
cannot transmute concrete into peaches or recycle 'phone poles into sugar.
The moving finger has written. We have gone astray by thinking that what
is good for capital is good for labor. It is a half truth, and we are now
having to face up to the other half.
  The microeconomic solution to unemployment also contains a macro-
economic solution. An important aspect of substituting labor for capital
and land is to apply labor to land more often and recover and reinvest
capital more often. This increases replacement demand, which is almost
all of aggregate demand, and does it without any inflation. The key to
good macroeconomic policy is not net new investment and growth of
capital, but turnover, recovery and reinvestment of capital. Favors to
capital are not favors to labor unless they come in such form as to
accelerate the cycling of capital, as the investment tax credit could.
144                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

                                Conclusion
  What can we now say about how to allocate capital so that its job-creat-
ing efficiency will be greater? A number of general rules follow from our
analysis.
  We need to stop regarding high output per worker as an adequate index
to efficiency, when this index mainly reflects overapplication of land,
primary products, and capital. Labor's interest is in having high marginal
productivity, not necessarily average.
  We need to foster things that humble folk do, directing capital where its
valence for labor is high, and for land low. This does not call for subsidies,
but for neutrality in taxation. There is some truth in the old slogan that
the rich can best help the poor by getting off their backs. This calls for a
considerable shift in values and attitudes, even on the part of the poor,
who often think as their own worst enemies (and so remain poor).
   We need to extract less from the earth, and to process, and recycle,
maintain and service more that we do extract. There is no rigid fixed
multiplier, as spokesmen for primary industries allege, by which down-
stream jobs depend on upstream mining or logging. Cheap logs are
butchered; dear ones are cherished laboriously. Cheap wood chips and
natural gas are burned off as waste; dear chips and gas are handled with
labor and love as feedstock and fuel.
  We need to use and improve land more, especially land already within
the perimeter of existing streets and roads and utilities. We need to
expand less into, and even contract away from, submarginal peripheral
hinterlands which soak up so much capital, and return so little, so slowly.
  We need to invest capital nearer the consumer, on the whole, and
farther from the bowels of the earth, for the labor content of value-added
and service flows generally rises downstream, in processing, manufactur-
ing ("making with hands"), services, trade, and so on. Even housing,
much of which is lavish of land and capital, complements labor by shelter-
ing it.
   Yet I would not legislate on any of the above generalizations, for they
are too vague, too exceptionable. That is why we have a price system, to
pinpoint more exactly our goals, and help achieve them.
   Thus there are sharp differences among extractive industries. Oil is
capital intensive, to be sure, and cartelized as well, which makes it more
so. But market-gardening is labor intensive, as shown in table 1. Strip-
mining is land-using and capital-using, but pit-mining uses labor. We
need something more subtle and accurate than a spasm of outrage against
primary products. We need pressures that will encourage those primary
producers who use more labor, and discourage those who waste capital
and land, and 'will apply the same pressures in the same measure right
down the line to the consumer. Again, that is what the market and the
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                          145

price system are for. We can achieve our goals best by working with them,
not by throwing them out. The abstract generalizations of price theory (as
in figures 1 and 2) often seem sterile and irrelevant because not clothed in
material examples, yet they are more relevant to our actual policy needs
than anything else because they deal with universal qualities of specific
examples.
   A general rule is that we should invest so as to recover capital faster.
This means that more of cash flow will be recovery of principal, and less
will be net income to the investor. This will cause a faster flow of reinvest-
ment to employ labor, and a faster flow of goods to feed us all. As an
example, most investment in drilling oil and gas wells is financed from the
cash flow of extant wells on stream; that is, it is internally financed by
recycling capital already in the industry. Each time capital goes into the
ground it makes jobs. Then we must wait until it comes out again to make
another round. The longer the wait, the fewer jobs created per decade by
each million of capital. Oil and gas owners happen to carry an inventory of
proven reserves whose minimum estimated Life Index is twelve years (and
probably ranges much higher), making the job valence of capital here very
low. As a corollary, most of the cash flow is property income, not capital
recovery.
   As another example, we could lower the capital cost of buildings a good
deal by shortening their service lives. This might seem like a bad trade,
since to reduce the cost by one-third we would reduce the life about two-
thirds. But we could then build 50 percent more houses each year with the
same capital, increasing the annual service flow by 50 percent. We would
increase jobs three times, since each building would be replaced in
one-third of the time. This example is highly oversimplified, ignoring
maintenance and rehabilitation as alternatives, but gives an idea of how
many jobs we destroy by sequestering a nation's capital in forms that pay
out slowly.
   Long advance inventories and durable flowing capital are not bad in
themselves. Deferral of recovery is the bad, and durability is the good that
usually accompanies it. The point here is that this good is forced on us
beyond our voluntary willingness to pay for it, and part of the cost is in-
voluntary unemployment.
   The life span of particular capital items is not to be judged in isolation.
Durable capital like that in a barn, a sewing machine, or restaurant fur-
nishings may complement and have a high valence for labor "in parallel,"
that is, labor applied in using and operating the equipment and short-
term investments in maintaining it. And the aggregate capital needs of the
overall operation, in a consolidated accounting, may be a modest share, if
the material moving through the process is finished and sold quickly.
146                                                     LAND USE EFFECTS

  The point about capital turnover is not that all durability is bad for
labor, but that capital which appears to drive labor off the land really does
so, even though labor helps produce the capital. And opening new lands,
seemingly so favorable to labor, may actually damage labor by pulling
capital into forms where it turns slower than before and so has a low
valence for labor.
   Or it may be that an operation uses little labor in parallel with capital
but a great deal downstream. Thus pulpmills use more capital per man
than sawmills, yet paper requires little downstream capital per man, while
lumber needs a lot. Newsprint turns over daily, while lumber in buildings
ties up capital for decades. Looking upstream, too, pulpmills use smaller
logs, and chips, and so require much less capital in timber than sawmills
do. It is the price system that weighs these compensating factors in the same
balance and lets us achieve an optimal total deployment and mixture of
labor, capital, and resources.
   Again, some durable capital may help labor by obviating even more
durable capital. Thus utility cores and elevators in high-rise buildings may
yield back capital slowly, but they use much less (for the functions per-
formed) than one alternative, that of expanding the city laterally by ex-
tending streets and utility lines (they return it faster, too, and with taxes to
boot). Also, high-rise helps labor by substituting for land, releasing a good
deal for other uses. Of course, there may be still better alternatives in re-
habilitating older houses, in low-rise garden apartments, and so on, de-
pending on particulars. The price system is what supplies us with these
particulars.
   The point is not to regard capital as a threat. Labor needs capital, and
labor suffers now from the shortage of capital available to invest where its
job-creating efficiency is high. The point is rather to mobilize capital and
redeploy it so that its valence for labor is higher. This means making it
available to small businesses, especially, and others which combine a little
capital with a lot of labor. And this means keeping capital out of sinks and
traps. Of these, the worst are monuments, frontiers, and wars. Let us
survey these three sinks of capital.
  By "monuments" I mean things built with one eye on eternity, like the
pyramids, and things that resemble them, like many works of govern-
ments and of other large organizations, the family seats of the very
wealthy, and overmature timber.
   Many monuments are built to make jobs. The intent is lost in the execu-
tion, for monuments soak up a maximum of capital per job created, and
yield a minimum of subsistence to advance to labor for the next job.
Public works to make jobs are one of history's great self-defeating, self-
deluding, tragic ironies. There is only a one-shot payroll, after which the
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                            147

capital stops recycling for a long time, often forever. One of the great stu-
pidities of all time, surely, was the English effort to relieve the Irish potato
famine of 1845-49 by hiring Irishmen to build roads. A large fraction of
the working population, 570,000 men, toiled for the Board of Works, while
food prices took off like a bird and while half the people died of starvation.74
The people needed subsistence for tomorrow morning, while public policy
directed their effort to the next century.
   An unrecognized self-defeating policy is the most dangerous concept
imaginable, for its failure will be taken as a sign that more is needed.
Could this be why some civilizations left such amazing tombstones as the
pyramids of Egypt, the temples of Angkor Vat and the Aztecs and Greece,
the mean canals, and the famous Roman roads, aqueducts, and public
buildings? It is grand to amaze future archeologists, but not at the cost of
destroying a civilization.
  The monument-building syndrome has many aspects. Generally, a
monument is anything too far ahead of demand. A great deal of heavy
construction and civil engineering is monumental, because tax-financed
and tax-free. Advance extensions of transport-utility networks, sized for
anticipated higher future needs, show monumental proclivities. They are
often financed by cross-subsidy from the central system, and calculated to
maintain the rate base, and/or internalize the profits. Excess capacity is
often monumental, unless geared to reasonable forecasts of early need.
Monumental excess capacity results from the use of capital as the ante in
some of life's poker games, where it is used to claim quotas: a share in a
cartel, a water right, a bank charter, an air route, an oil lease, or what
have you. "Buying business" is the current phrase for it. Inventories of
extractive resources are commonly excessive for a complex of reasons.75
"Master plans" and "fully-integrated development" are usually monu-
mental,' unless carefully staged; splendid examples are the California
Water Plan, the California highway system, the U.S. Interstate Highway
System, and the sterile city of Brasilia. "Internalizing externalities,"
"economies of scale," "planning for future expansion," and "foresight"
are excellent catchwords for monument builders. Meanwhile, life is what
happens while we are making other plans, and obsolescence is what
happens to big plans under, construction or soon after. Governments,
world banks, and Wall Street all tend to favor monuments, for their pub-
licity and promotional value. Hot-house "regional development," often
promoted by local unions and contractors seeking jobs, has all the monu-
mental traits. The headquarters and towers of large public and private
organizations of every description tend towards the monumental, as do
many of their other works. Every large organization seeks to internalize
profits and keep the capital under control of the management.
148                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

   There is massive inertia in all established agencies, so as capital grows
 scarce they shut their eyes to what the new parameter demands. It is still
possible for the breeder reactor's spokesmen to abandon it because of its
capital-intensiveness.76 But FEA Administrator John C. Sawhill wants
$500 billion for Project Independence, and does not regard capital as the
prime constraint, but labor.77 Barry Bosworth and James Duesenberry
favor still pumping cheap capital into housing. 78 It is hard to plug a flow-
ing drain of national capital.
   Turning to "frontiers," these are the imperialistic variation of Henry
George, getting access to land via conquest and expansion (a variation
which reverses George's purport). There is some truth in the old idea of
the frontier as a safety valve for labor, but a generation of revisionist eco-
nomic historians now have established that the frontier attracted more
than its quota of capital per man, much of it prematurely. This led to re-
current crises of capital shortage in the nineteenth century. We tap fron-
tiers by building monuments like the canals of the 1830s, the premature
western railroads, and the dams of the Army Corps of Engineers.
   The payout from much developmental infrastructure capital comes in
the form of increased land values. But to private owners this increment is
income, most of which is normally consumed. Thus the capital is dissipated.
  Frontiers of Science and Research and Invention are another Lorelei for
capital. As Boulding has rhymed,79 they yield "benefits hereafter." These
are tax exempt because the capital cost is expensible. Yoram Barzel has
shown that the patent system, too, hyperactivates research in the same
way that an open range overstimulates grazing. Research in subsidized Ag-
riculture Experiment Sations has gotten decades out ahead of dissemina-
tion and application. We need to embody faster in real capital what we
already know, and adapt it more frequently to changing needs and scarci-
ties, prices and costs, by replacing capital faster.
   The energy frontier is the current vogue. Incredible figures like a trillion
dollars are tossed off as capital "requirements" of pipelines, drilling,
breeder reactors, fusion, tankers, ports, etc., requirements that will ob-
viously never be met because the capital doesn't exist or can't be spared
and won't be saved.
   As a broad generalization, where we use capital to substitute for land,
or open frontiers, the capital is very durable. It lies in close with land and
resembles it and takes on some of its durability. Wicksell called such ob-
jects "rent-goods," because they so resemble land. Examples are survey-
ing and exploring, cuts and fills, drainage, levelling, clearance, founda-
tions, pipes, tiles, wells, pits, shafts, canals, tunnels, bridges, dams, and
roadbeds. The permanence of land warrants building long life into capital
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                           149

that develops it. The rise of land values converts flowing into growing
capital.
   The upper levels of skyscrapers are also land-substitutes of long life,
and high capital input. While intensive improvement of the best sites is
generally desirable on balance all around, we suffer today from uneven
improvement of sites, that is, high-rise sprawl or scattered hyperintensifi-
cation. This pattern is more capital using, as a total system, than more
uniform improvements at moderate densities.
   Frontier governments often go overboard competing for seed capital.
They put a high value on immediate payrolls from construction—an
aspect of their high time-preference. They give away too much to get it:
tax holidays, de facto pollution easements, resource leases on giveaway
terms, land grants, charters, franchises, special services, and so on. These
nonmarket fillips pull capital into premature and marginal development
on frontiers. The form of the lure for capital. like borrowing a city's credit,
often prompts excessively capital-intensive forms of investment. Granting
pollution easements lowers the capacity of surrounding land to house
labor and attract people generally.
   During a boom, frontiers drain capital from older centers without doing
much obvious immediate damage, but when it is time, as now, to renew
the older centers, the frontiers do not return the capital. They demand
more and more, having fallen into the seed-capital fallacy initially.
   Subsidies to tap frontiers make land artifically abundant. This is sup-
posed to help make outlets for labor, and in some ways does. But frontier-
ing taps new land at the cost of sequestering capital. Frontiers soak up
scarce capital and hold it so that it stops cycling and creating payrolls.
Abundant land can still be badly used, and centuries of Caucasion expan-
sion in the new world in a futile flight from unemployment have shown
frontiers are not enough. Labor doesn't need great reservoirs of underused
land so much as pressure to use the land we already have, and working
capital to help labor use it.
   The third great sink of capital is war, and the policies of mercantilism
and imperialism that attend it. War combines the frontier fallacy and the
public works syndrome and the waste-makes-jobs doctrine into a claim on
the national treasure that can become greatly inflated above the simple
cost of police protection. It costs money to win land—and one doesn't
always win. Someone, indeed, always loses. Policing marginal outposts
after they are supposedly "won" can be a continuing drain, as in Viet
Nam. If and when land is won and secured, finally, the net benefits of the
whole military outlay often accrue to a very few large owners of the land in
question, as in California and Hawaii, or to foreign potentates like Mo-
150                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

hammed Reza Pahlevi or King Faisal who turn around and exploit us and
drain us of more capital, or to multinationals who reinvest mainly abroad
and bed down with the foreign potentates. Imperialism has generally been
an economic catastrophe for most of the players for the benefit of a few.
   To keep capital from wasting into those sinks calls for massive institu-
tional and attitudinal changes. Attitudes are surprisingly adaptable, and
we see evidence on every hand of eagerness to adapt life styles to scarcity,
even in advance of need. Institutions are something else. They are the
stubborn rear guard, shutting out the signals of the times and resisting our
efforts to budge them. But this, too, will pass in the coming time of
troubles, as the lag of institutions behind current needs creates overpower-
ing tensions. Here, we focus on tax policy. The question is, are we pre-
pared, once the rear guards yield, to budge tax policy in the right
directions?
   Rule One is to retain and strengthen the price system as much as possi-
ble, and be wary of rules couched in other terms. The price mechanism is
the only way we have of treating the economy as a total system and apply-
ing rules consistently in the same measure throughout.
   The best tax on all counts is the part of the property tax that falls on
land values. The other part that falls on capital is far from the worst tax. It
is the surest way to tax capital without favoring longer lives over shorter.
So we should make greater use of the property tax at the same time that we
increase the share of it that falls on land.
   The property tax on holding land presses landholders to use the land.
This employs labor and produces goods and services. It also abates the
pressure to waste precious capital developing new lands.
  The land tax pressure should be applied with greatest force to land
already serviced by extant underutilized capital. There is a hard choice to
make when we know that some extant public works, roads and lines are
badly placed in terms of long-run good planning. The choice has to hinge
on particulars. Today one overriding particular is the crisis of capital
shortage, and the choice should often go to pressing into use land pres-
ently serviced. As there is a surplus, however, we have some choices and
can begin immediately an orderly retreat from the most remote submar-
ginal extensions and outposts. But infilling of some good land bypassed by
public works may now wait a while until capital is cheaper. This calls for
land assessments more influenced by near than far future income. But
then, the high interest rates that signal the capital shortage will push
market values that way anyway. There is a lot to be said for having asses-
sors simply follow that most useful of pilots, the market.
  Added revenues from land taxes should be used to lower other taxes.
But the property tax on buildings and machinery and other capital should
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                           151

be about the last to go. It is the only tax based on capital standing still in-
stead of moving. It serves much like an increase in the rate of interest, to
steer capital into forms cycling faster, with higher valence for labor. Real-
ization or liquidation of capital, the base for income and excise taxes, is
what feeds us as consumers and employs us as workers. Passive invest-
ment, the base for the property tax, employs no one.
   We must prepare to accept the decline in investments of high capital
intensity that a less-biased tax system would cause. For that is the whole
point, to spare scarce capital and release it for higher uses. Even over-
mature trees, a form of extravagant monument revered by many otherwise
thrifty and ascetic outdoors-persons, must yield, although it consoles some
to note that capital shortage also dictates using more labor on each log
after cutting, and fewer logs in each house.
   The first tax to cut is the payroll tax. The major payroll tax is the per-
sonal income tax on earned income (wages and salaries). How far to carry
this gets into value judgments beyond our present scope, but some first
steps are clear enough. We should forget about revenue sharing, which
substitutes federal payroll and other activity-based taxes for local property
taxes. This taxes labor to relieve property. Federal grants to local people
should go to persons, not governments, and what better way to do this
than lower the personal income tax on earned income?
   Among other benefits, this would help make localities more hospitable
toward workers as residents. Now, central government taxes individuals to
subsidize local governments, which turn around and zone out poor indi-
viduals because their disposable after-tax income is so low they might
dilute local property tax bases. Ideally, central governments would relate
to individuals as their net benefactors, instead, and localities would com-
pete to attract persons. Lowering payroll taxes increases the incentive both
to work and to hire, and a secure employed worker would be as good a
neighbor as one usually finds.
   We should decline current proposals to widen income tax loopholes for
property. This can only shove more burden onto payrolls and make our
income tax resemble more that of England, the sick man of Europe.8'
Labor is supposed to benefit from the greater investment, but our analysis
has shown that labor needs faster reinvestment. Ignoring this central truth
is one of the truly great and damaging economic fallacies, leading us to
think we must spoil capital to employ labor. It is, rather, payroll taxes that
slow down reinvestment, by making labor look artificially dear to employ-
ers and motivating them to substitute capital and land for it. Special tax
favors for capital almost all favor deepening capital and slowing reinvest-
ment. The only exception is the investment tax credit, stripped of the
present sliding scale.
152                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

   Instead, we should plug the loopholes for land and capital so that we
can lower the tax rate, relieving payrolls. It would be a good idea to re-
instate a generous lower rate on earned income as well, for we will be a
long time plugging a hundred clever loopholes, some subtle and others
complex beyond easy reform.
  We should remove biases that favor long over short investments. It is
too much to expect that we could tax accruals and imputed income an-
nually, as the Haig-Simons logic would have it, and the more workable
alternative is to strengthen the property tax, which reaches the same end
by a different route. But we could remove all explicit biases granting lower
rates to longer investments. Capital gains treatment is the greatest of
these, with all it implies, and we could also doaway with all the sliding
scales that apply higher rates against shorter investments.
   Although we cannot easily tax appreciation other than by the property
tax, we can and do deduct depreciation, and a neutral tax policy here will
key tax depreciation to real asset value depreciation, removing biases
against shorter-lived capital described in section B, above.
   Having turned the income tax back into a tax that includes property
income, we could abate the corporate income tax, with its powerful bias
for internalizing new capital. A progressive rate might be very helpful to
break up the largest corporations which, as we have seen, employ the few-
est workers per unit of capital. Undistributed profits should be taxable to
stockholders on the same basis as dividends.
   Public works are major sinks of capital. They need to pay property and
income taxes, and the agencies in charge should show these in the budget,
if only as shadow costs, along with interest at full market rates. Here we
need tread carefully, remembering the logic of marginal cost pricing, and
remembering that the right works in the right place, like subways in New
York, can save much more capital than they consume. Let us look last to
the subway for revenue, and first to the capital and land in highways, cars,
trucks, terminals, gas stations, parking lots, garages, refineries, and car
lots.
   A decreasing-cost distribution system is ideally priced to yield a deficit,
according to a rationale now familiar. The value is imputed to the land
served, and that is the proper tax base. The deficit-yielding subsystem has
no value and should pay no property tax, but receive a subsidy. That is a
good principle in its place, but it is hard to keep it there. Cross-subsidies
and submarginal extensions become the rule, wasting capital. Here the
solution is user charges, especially peak pricing and area rates, which
force users to economize on the capital and serve as substitutes for excess
capacity. Fortunately there is a wide literature on this subject to supple-
ment these spare and summary words.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                   153

  Another needed change is the tax treatment of income from offshore.
We cannot suddenly create much new capital, but we can summon back a
great mass of it now lost to us offshore by removing the egregious special
loopholes for U.S. capital invested abroad.
  These are some steps toward a tax system less biased for monuments
and frontiers, more geared to help make jobs by mobilizing and activating
wealth. If we do this, and like the results, we can go further. Meantime,
these steps represent substantial progress.
      They will help u find full employment on our present land base,
permanently, freed from the compulsion to grow and expand that we in-
herited from generations of ancestors who had not yet learned the finite
limits of the Earth. We can continue to create capital, and we can apply
new ideas more quickly than now as faster replacement lets us embody
new techniques in capital in a shorter time. Thus we can grow in every
good sense by substituting real progress for the random lateral expansion
of the past. We can find full employment in peaceful labor on our share of
this small planet, and doing so, drop the burden of imperialism that may
otherwise destroy us.

Appendix I. Share of Labor in Claim on Total Output as Decreasing Function of
           Life of Capital: Identity of Single-cycle and Going-concern Models

Flowing (Depreciating) Capital
   The text shows (fig. 6.1, table 6.4) that the share of labor in revenues from the
service flow of a building or machine (flowing capital) is a decreasing function of
life. Here we show the rule, and the mathematics are exactly the same in a "going
concern" model where an investment in machines is normalized or staggered.
   There is one machine of every age. We build or buy one new machine each year,
and scrap another one. The number of extant machines is n, where n is the number
of years each machine lasts. As in text equation I, each one yields a flow of SI per
year, so the yearly flow is Sn.
  The yearly labor input is no more than the warranted investment (1) in one ma-
chine when new. Dividing this by the yearly service flow (n) we arrive at the same
result as when we analyze one machine over life, that is., labor's share is
                    —
(2)             =         [same as text eq. 2]
            n       n
  The share going to capital as interest must be the complement of (2), of course.
To check this, let us derive it directly.
      The capital value remaining unrecovered in each machine at the start of every
year, y, is the present value (V) offuture cash flows from that time until scrapping.

(3)         ,= I — i
154                                                                   LAND USE EFFECTS

Total unrecovered capital (Kr) is

(4)         K== e" y=o
                                   —
                                         +
                                             1— e
                                                    .
                                                    I
                                                            1)
                                                                 ++   1   —

                                                                              I

                         — em      e] =             —
                                                        1

                                                            —e1
Interest on K as a share of total output flow is
            iK,          1—
(5)
             n                In

Q.E.D.
  In the going concern, capital recovery is the excess of cash flow (n) above interest
cost (Ki). Rearranging (5)

            n—Ki=
                         1—   e"
(5A)

But the right side of(5A) is I, the warranted investment to build a new machine. So
capital recovery from all the machines together is just enough to finance one new
machine each year.
      Now we add land to the inputs. The capital is a building on a good site. The
yearly service flow is now $1 plus Sa, where a is the annual value of the site. Fig. 4
shows the share of land:




      $




      Figure 6.4—Division of value of service flow of n houses of evenly staggered ages among
                        warranted investment (I), rent (a), and interest.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                     155

  K remains the same as before. So does I. Only service flow is greater. The shares
of labor and capital are accordingly smaller.
  The share of land is
             na          a
                    =
          n(l+a) l+a
(6) is not a function of n, i.e. it is unaffected by life (under the present simplifying
assumption of level service flow). Accordingly, the share of land rises relative to
labor, and falls relative to capital with increasing life of capital.
   The last point seems a little surprising, because in the last years of an old building
the cash flow covers little more than land rent. In part, the surprising result comes
from my artificial simplifying assumption of level cash flow over "life." In fact,
there is a geriatric terminal life of old buildings, after the service life is over, when
the carcass survives and yields just enough cash flow to giye a return on the site.
When we include this terminal period in "life," the share of land rises with life, and
more so when site value rises over time.
  But that is not the whole story. In the main, the surprising result represents a real
phenomenon: to build for long-sustained service flow of capital calls for heavy
inputs of capital from the beginning of life, inputs which must be paid from the
beginning. Note that we are not here treating what happens from year to year to
the individual building as it ages and the unrecovered capital approaches zero.
Of course, capital's share then also approaches zero. We are treating of shares over
the whole life of buildings, and, what amounts to the same thing, shares generated
from a normalized collection of buildings of every age.
   The share of labor falls with increasing life. But land tempers this effect by claim-
ing a share of the product even when life is short, like the life of corn plants in rich
Champaign County,.Illinois; or when there is little capital, as on a parking lot.
Appendix 3 develops this aspect further.


Growing (Appreciating) Capital
  Assume that we plant a tree on marginal land, at a cost of Si, and harvest it n
years later (when the growth of its stumpage value as a percentage of the base equals
the rate of interest). Stumpage revenue (R) is e". Labor's share is no more than
e", and less if planting cost is not all wages. e" is a decreasing function of n.
Labor gets a lesser share when life is longer.
  This conclusion does not depend on using a single cycle as an example. Let the
operation be normalized by staggering the cycles to keep a constant flow of input
and output through a going concern. Each year we plant one new tree, and harvest
the oldest one. The number of trees in our inventory must equal n, an increasing
function of n. In addition, the average tree must be older and contain more capital.
  The capital stock (K) is the sum of the value of all the trees:

(7)       K=ei+e2j++e,i=e_dt
156                                                                    LAND USE EFFECTS

      The share of capital in receipts is

(8)

(8) is an increasing function of n, and of course the complement of labor's share,
e", a decreasing function of n. This is exactly the same result as for a single cycle.
  Now we add land. Let the tree grow on a good site, of value S. Now growth must
ëover interest on S as well as on capital in the tree, by reaching at maturity a value
on the function:
(9)82        R = c"1 + S[em — 1] = (1 + S)e"1 — S
  The share of labor is no more than 1/R, obviously a decreasing function of n
since R grows with n.
   The share of land is Sin/R. We will see ahead that this is an arcade function, an
increasing and then decreasing function of n. The increase comes first because
labor's share drops almost inversely with n for low values of n. The decrease comes
later because K increases logarithmically with n so that Ki takes nearly all.
  The share of capital is the sum of interest on planting cost plus interest on ground
rent, divided by R.
             Interest on planting cost is e1" — 1
             Interest on ground rent is S(e1" — 1 — in)83
The share of capital is
             ei" + S(e" — 1) — 1 — Sin —            1    + Sin
(10)                                        — 1 —
                    e1"+S(e1"—1)                          R

(10) is also the complement of land's and labor's shares, as we would expect.
   To normalize the single cycle, assume a fixed piece of land divided into n cells or
tracts. Each year we plant trees in one cell, and harvest another. Payroll to plant
one cell is 1/n. Receipts each year are R/n. Yearly land cost is Si, and for each cell is
Si/n.
  The capital stock at all times is
                 "    + S)? — S                         c"' — 1
                          (1
(11)         K3=               n
                                       =(1+S)             ni
                                                              .   —S
                    y=1

Receipts each year are
             R
(12)             = (1 + S)e"1 — S

Labor's share is

(13)
             R/n R
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                   157

(13) is the same as the single cycle case.
Land's share is
         Si     Sin
(14)

(14) too is the same as ttie single cycle case.
Capital's share is
(15)
          Ki(1+S)(e— 1)—Sin
          R/n                R
But (15) is the same as (10), the share of capital in the single cycle case.
   So we have normalized tree-growing operations and shown that the shares of
land, labor, and capital are the same as when we look at one cycle over its life.
  Now let us get a better idea of how the shares vary as functions of life (n). Table
6.5 is an example worked out for assumed values, with i = .05, and S = 800. Instead
of assuming the original investment is $1, as in. the algebra above, it is $200,
assumed to be all payroll (P).
   Applying the principle of leverage, it is evident from table 6.5 that a slight rise
of interest rates will screen out or shorten long cycles, as we would expect from the
simpler earlier demonstration. A rise of wage rates will screen out or lengthen short
cycles—we economize on labor by using it less often. For very long cycles, interest
cost dominates everything. Such long cycles are, however, unusual outside of
forestry, and often pathological there, permitted only by sheltering from real
interest costs. For most growing capital, cycles are under fifteen years, and land
cost is a powerful force. High land rents screen out or shorten medium cycles. An
example that the model partly fits is cattle breeding, a very land-using business.
High interest rates are not enough to pry land away from cattle and sheep and feed
grain, the great historical depopulators of farm land. High holding costs must be
brought directly to bear on the tenure of land.84
  Historically, farm labor has had to clear away trees to find jobs working the
land, and then to push back sheep and range cattle. These organisms of slow
maturity create virtual economic deserts for labor. Even the capital in them is
mostly geogenic (land derived). Now for some decades forests and livestock have
been repossessing land formerly tilled, while farm labor has left for the cities, and
food prices have risen. Something is scrambling the market signals; we have seen
that tax bias is part of that something.
   Aside from the intuitive leverage principle, how do higher rents and interest
rates shorten life? It is geometrically obvious that any tree is mature financially in,
equilibrium when its growth curve touches he R function, where it has the same
slope. Differentiating (9):

(16)      =ie(l
          dn
                +S)=i(R+S)
(16) says that a tree is mature in the year when its growth just covers interest on its
achieved value (iR) plus rent (iS). Raising rent and interest thus results in shorter
cycles.
TABLE 6.5
Factor Shares as Functions of Life of Trees, Normalized Operation
                                                                                     Land            Interest on           Sum of
                     Interest                              Wages                     rent           cap.      stock        shares      Intensive-
                     factors              Receipts      Am't   Share         Am't           Share   Am't     Share         (check)       ness
   (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)     (9)         (10)       (11)         (12)

             em           eT1           1000 (2) —800    200        (5)       40             40                  (9)    (6)+(8)+(10)   (6)+(10)
                                             (1)          (1)       (4)                      (4)                 (4)
    1        1.05                1.00       250         200        .80        40             .16     10          .04        1.00          .84
    7        1.41               8.14         87          29        .33        40             .46     20          .23        1.02          .56
   14        1.97           19.6             84          14        .17        40             .48     30          .36        1.01          .53
   21        2.79           35.7             94           9.5      .10        40             .43     45          .48        1.01          .58
   28        3.92           58.4            111           7.1      .06        40             .36     65          .59        1.01          .65
   35        5.52           90.3            135           5.7      .04        40             .30     90          .67        1.01          .71
   42        7.76          135              166           4.8      .03        40             .24    120          .72         .99          .75
   49       10.9            198             206           4.1      .02        40             .19    160          .78         .99          .80
   56       15.4          288               261           3.4      .01        40             .15    215          .82         .98          .83
   63      21.5           410               328           3.2      .01        40             .12    285          .87        1.00          .88
   70      30.4           588               423           2.9      .007       40             .09    380          .90        1.00          .91
   77      42.7           834               544           2.6      .005       40             .07    500          .92        1.00          .93
   84      60.2          1184               707           2.4      .003       40             .06    665          .94        1.00          .94
 Notes by column numbers:
 (1) Life.                                               (7) Si800x.05zr40.
 (2) Amount of 1 at compound interest, 5%.                                     (3)                         (3)
 (3) Amount of annuity at 5%.                            (9) Ki = .05 1000 — — .05 800 = 50 ——40.
                                                                               (1)                         (1)
 (4) (P+S)eS                                            (11) Discrepancies due to rounding.
                                                        (12) Intensiveness.
     P = 200
     S =800
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                 159

         Appendix 2. Investor's Rate of Return after Tax on Realization
                          of Income from Growing Capital85
   The rate of return after tax, (r), is an increasing function of life, (n).

(17)        e"=e1'(1—t)+t=O
where t is the nominal tax rate.
   To prove: dr/dn>0

(18)        g             'the growth rate ofO(n)

(19)
            Ifl9=J0=fgdfl
but from (1), In O=rn, so that

(20)
            r=ijgdn
   By inspection of(4) and the Theorem of the Mean, r must be rising if g is mono-
tonically rising, i.e., if dg/dn >0.

(21)
            dg d til tiO'
                dr
                —>0
                do

Q.E.D.

       Appendix 3. "Intensity" of Land Use and "Labor Intensity" of Land Use
   "Intensity" of land use and "labor intensity" of land use are two different
things. Capital on land may displace more labor than it requires to produce it.
Much capital is partly geogenic (earth-derived), by the operation of compound
interest.
 We will compare the overall Intensity Quotient (Q) and labor-intensity (Q,).
We begin with a point-input-point-output (PIPO) model, and easily modify it to
cover all cases.
  We invest SI at the beginning of year one, on land worth $S, and realize SR after
n years.
  In equilibrium
(22)        R = Ie' + S(e1 — 1)
(23)        Labor input I
(24)        Land input = Sin
160                                                             LAND USE EFFECTS

(25)     Capital input = I(e" — 1) + S(e" — 1) — Sin
                                   I
(26)     Labor intensity, Q,
                                       R—Sin
(27)      But total intensity, =        R
                  R — le'" in           R — Ie'"[     in
          =1—
                   e"—l                     R     Let_l
   The coefficient on the right in (27) (in brackets for easy reference), is the ratio of
simple interest to compound interest. Call it 0. For low values of n, 0—*1, and :.
Q—*Ie"/R. But e1"—*1 also, so Q—*I/R. That is, Q—Q,. and intensity and labor-
intensity are the same, virtually, for short lives.
   But for higher values of n, i.e. longer lives, 0—*0 and :. Q— 1, even if labor-
intensity, I/R, is low. This reflects the buildup of geogenic and autogenetic capital
that occurs whenever recovery of principal is deferred.
   To adapt this definition of intensity to flowing capital, we need only date all in-
puts, discount them to year 0, and add these present values to I. Similarly com-
pound all revenues to year n and add ,them to R. Most investors above the lowest
level of sophistication go through some such analysis whatever they may call it.
 Cash-flow analysis, annualizing, present value analysis, land appraisal, etc., all
 involve this kind of intertemporal commensuration.
    Normally w, the share of I paid out for onsite workers, is much less than one, so
 true labor-intensity
                    I
(28)      wI/R < —.
                    R

There is on a priori grounds a strong negative relationship between w and n, be-
cause building durably calls for heavy materials, of high resource content.
  (27) is based on deriving site value, 5, from the current use, which is to assume
the site is in its highest use. Often it is not, in which case (27) overstates intensity. If
we have reason to put an opportunity cost value on S higher than R — Ie1"/e" — 1,
then we should not substitute this in (27), but stop at
                        Sin
(27A)

(27A) gives a lower value which can easily even be negative when R fails to cover
simple interest on 5, or rent.
   The only good reason for managing land this way would be to save it for a
higher future use. Yet the foregone revenues of these n years must then be regarded
as plowed back into the site as "intangible geogenic capital." The present property
tax is biased by virtue of failing to tax such capital, thus favoring it over buildings.
   Landholders, like some government agencies and corporations who are sheltered
 from social opportunity costs, are doubly disinclined to turn over their capital
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                      161

fast enough. The land cost itself is a pressure to shorten cycles; but so is interest on
the intangible geogenic capital which they do not feel. The last point has been en-
tirely neglected and is very important.

Appendix 4. Inflation, Phantom Profits, and Tax Bias against Shorter Investments
  We compare two PIPO investments, one maturing in one year, the other in ten.
 = .07, and there is annual inflation at 7%. t = 50%.
                              I            R           R—   I   R — Ie°7"   (R — I)t

  n=1                        100          114           14           7           7
  n    = 10                  100          400          300        200          150

  When n= 1, half the profit of $14 is phantom, and the 50% tax rate consumes the
the other half.
  When n= 10, only one-third of the $300 profit is phantom, so the tax leaves $50
of real profit after tax.
   More generally,
(29)      Taxable income = R(n) —
(30)          Adjusted basis = 1e3"
wherej is the rate of annual inflation.
  In equilibrium
(31)          R(n) =

   Income adjusted for inflation is

(32)          R(n)
                     —   le'" =       —   Ie" = Ie"(e1" — 1)
   Taxable incomeas a multiple of adjusted income is

(33)          /3 =
                     I[e°"    —
                               1] =   e°" —       1

                     Ie"(e°' — 1)   e'         — e3"

   /3 is a decreasing function of n, ranging from a high of /3=(i+j/i) when n= 1, to a
 low of one when n=cxj.
   The case is often made that it is the opposite, that inflation hits the longer invest-
ments harder. The argument is that the short investment lets principal be recovered
at a lower price level, while it is worth more. It is an unbalanced argument, over-
looking the larger fact that the long investment lets revenue be taxed later, in softer
dollars. That is, when n= 1, the $7 phantom profit is taxed in year one and paid in
dollars worth twice as much as those of year ten. When the phantom profit merely
accrues in year one it is not taxed until year ten, when the dollar is worth half as
much.
   As we have seen, most long investments are written off faster than they actually
depreciate. The intertemporal bias here is magnified because costs are deducted
from hard dollars and taxes are later levied on soft ones.
162                                                       LAND USE EFFECTS

                                     Notes
 1 Business Week, Sept. 9, 1972, P. 114, citing data from U.S.B.L.S. Wage
    rates have risen faster in Japan, Italy, Germany, Britain, and France. The
    data are for wages before taxes. U.S. payroll taxes have also risen in this
    period.
 2 Paul A. Samuelson, Economics, 3rd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1955)
    p. 336.
 3 Ibid., p. 350.
 4 "Nixon Must Alter His Game Plan," Washington Post, Aug. 23, 1970, p. Gi.
 5 Inflation (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1970), p. 9.
 6 New York Times, Dec. 1970.
 7 Newsweek, April 20, 1970, p. 91.
 8 "The Budget is the Spur," Newsweek, Jan. 31, 1972, PP. 63-64
 9 "Resharpening the Tools," Business Week, Jan. 5, 1974, P. 56.
10 "Capital Shortage, or Glut?" Newsweek, Aug. 1974, p. 73.
11 John Kendrick, Productivity Trends in the U.S. (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, 1961), Pp. 148-49, table 39.
12 Cited in "The Push to get More from Men and Machines," Business Week,
     Sept. 9, 1972, pp. 80-81.
13 Jack Stockfisch, "Investment Incentive, Taxation, and Accelerated Deprecia-
     tion," SE,! 24 (1), 28-40 (July 1957), p. 38. Since land is not depreciable,
     these tax preferences theoretically do not apply to land income. In practice,
     however, land income is as sheltered as capital income. (Mason Gaffney,
     "The Treatment of Land Income," Economic Analysis and the Efficiency of
     Government [Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the U.S., 91st Con-
     ress: 1st Session, part 2, 1970], pp. 405-15.) Keynesians have not been at all
     alert to this problem.
14 They are simply financed with owned instead of borrowed capital. The rele-
     vant "term" is how long the capital sunk is tied up before being fully re-
     covered. "Recovery" is the residual after deducting interest from cash or
     service flow, and may be very slow and even negative when interest rates are
     high and cash flow low.
15 Norman Ture, Tax Policy, Capital Formation, and Productivity (New York:
     National Association of Manufacturers, 1973). The whole case made by Ture
     rests on assuming that capital complements labor, an assumption built into
      the Cobb-Douglas function. See his p. 14, "The Law of Diminishing
      Returns."
16 Knut Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy, Trans. E. Classen (New York:
    The Macmillan Company, 1938), pp. 194-96.
17 The research group at Resources for the Future has devoted years to belabor-
    ing this point in respect to pollution control. The object here is to generalize
    the point to the whole economy.
18 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (New York: Random House, 1937),
    pp. 538-40.
19 Ernst R. Berndt and David Wood, "Technology, Prices, and the Derived De-
 GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                             163

    mand for Energy," preliminary draft, December 1973, 28 PP. A most percep-
    tive and more general treatment is Sanford Rose "The Far-reaching Con-
    sequences of High-priced Oil," Fortune, March 1974, pp. 106-12, 191-96.
20 Mason Gaifney, "Diseconomies Inherent in Western Water Laws," in Eco-
    nomic Analysis of Multiple Use, Proceedings of Western Agricultural Eco-
    nomics Research Council, Range and Water Section, 1961, pp. 55-82, 75 if.
    See also Irvin H. Althouse, "Water Requirements of Tulare County," Report
    to Tulare County Board of Supervisors, January 1942 (mimeographed), map
    in back pocket.
21 This is simplified. The commensurable combining of labor and capital inputs
    is formularized in appendix 3.
22 G. W. Dean and Chester 0. McCorkle, Trends for Major California Fruit
    Crops, California A.E.S., Extension Service Circular 448, 1960.
23 William Shrader and N. Landgren, "Land Use Implications of Agricultural
    Production Potentional," in L. Fischer, ed., Shjfts in Land Use (Nebraska
    Agricultural Economics Service, 1964).
24 John Riew, "Assigning Collection of a Statewide Uniform Rate Land Tax," in
    R. Lindholm, ed., Property Taxation and the Finance of Education (Madi-
    son, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974).
25 Morton Paglin, "Surplus Agricultural Labor and Development," American
    Economic Review, September 1965, pp. 815-33.
26 Albert Berry, "Presumptive Income Tax on Agricultural Land," National
     Tax Journal, June 1972, pp. 169-81.
27 Jon Udell, Economic and Social Consequences of the Merger Movement in
     Wisconsin (Madison: Bureau of Business Research, 1969).
28 Richard Muth, "Capital and Current Expenditures in the Production of Hous-
     ing," in L. Harriss, ed., Government Spending and Land Values (Madison:
    University of Wisconsin Press, 1973).
29 A collection of such cases is documented in U.S. Congress, The Analysis and
    Evaluation of Public Expenditure: The PPB System, (Joint Economic Com-
    mittee, Subcommittee on Economy in Government. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
    Government Printing Office, 1969).
30 David Weeks and Charles West, The Problem of Securing Closer Relation-
    ship between Agricultural Development and Irrigation Construction, Univer-
    sity of California, College of Agriculture, Agricultural Economic Service Bul-
    letin 435 (Berkeley: University of California Printing Office, 1927).
31 An example of such thinking unrelieved by any apparent doubt of its
    adequacy is Bert G. Hickman, Investment Demand and U.S. Economic
    Growth (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1965). Nor could I
    name any Brookings economist who takes a different view. Close to power and
    the application of economic ideas to policy, Brookings plays a central role in
    defining the orthodoxy that has dominated pAicy to date.
32 Mason Gaffney, "Adequacy of Land as a Tax Base," Daniel Holland, ed.,
    The Assessment of Land Value (Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin
    Press, 1969).
164                                                         LAND USE EFFECTS

33 If the buyer pays on the installment plan at 8% interest over n years, he pays
     the full n, the entire service flow, because
                        i      l—e"t
               nx                       =n.
                    l—e"'          i

34 Martin Bailey, National Income and the Price Level (New York: McGraw-
     Hill, 1962), p. 111.
35 Hans Brems, Output, Employment, Capital, and Growth (New York: Harper
     & Bros., 1959), pp. 212-26.
36 C. Harry Kahn, Employee Compensation under the Income Tax (Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 1968).
37 If this word doesn't exist, it should.
38 It often helps the fund manager most of all. Companies can, for example,
     borrow from their own pension funds, as the U.S. Treasury borrows from the
     Social Security fund. The borrower gains from inflation, while the pensioner
     is exploited. Pensioners are also exploited by managers taking bad risks, and
     some funds are unable to meet their obligations.
39 There is a wide literature on this, including Holland, ed., Assessment of Land
      Value.
40 Mason Gaffney, "Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital," WE,! 5 (4): 308-23
    (September 1967). An expanded version ran in American Journal of Eco-
    nomics and Sociology, from January 1970 to January 1971. The material on
    land income is in vol. 29 (3): 409-24, and is much more fully treated than in
    the WE.!. A more institutional approach is used in Mason Gaifney, "The
    Treatment of Land Income," Economic Analysis and the Efficiency of Gov-
    vernment (Joint Economic Committee, Congress of the U.S., 91st Congress:
    1st Session, part 2, 1970), pp. 405-15.
41 Before World War II, salaries paid by state and local governments were free
    of federal income tax. Then salaries became taxable, while the cost of hiring
    capital remained exempt.
42 The best source on this is in a series of studies sponsored by Ralph Nader,
    available from the Tax Reform Research Group, Washington, D.C.
43 Alfred Kahn, "The Depletion Allowance in the Context of Cartelization,"
    American Economic Review 54 (June 1965), pp. 286-314.
44 Gaifney, Extractive Resources, pp. 391 if.
45 Mason Gaifney, "Benefits of Military Spending," unpublished MS., 1973.
46 Rose, "Far-reaching Consequences."
47 Ellis T. Williams, State Forest Tax Law Digest, 1967, U.S.D.A. Forest
      Service, Misc. Pub. No. 1077, 1968.
48 Ellis Williams, State Guides for Assessing Forest Land and Timber,
    U.S.D.A. Forest Service, Misc. Pub. No. 1061, 1967.
49 A proof is in Gaifney, "Tax-induced Slow Turnover, p. 318, and a more gen-
      eral one by Vickrey and Consigny is appendix 2 of the same title, AJES 30 (1):
      107-8 (January 1971)
50 For more detail see Robert Evenson and Finis Welch, "Taxation of Farm
    Income," MS., n.d., 22 pp., available from authors.
GAFFNEY: Toward Full Employment                                                  165

51   Dale Hoover, "An Economic Analysis of Farmland Development," Agri-
     cultural Economics Research 22 (April 1970), pp. 37-44, p. 42. See also "One
     Man's Poison," Forbes, Aug. 15, 1965, p. 27, showing how housing builders
     can expense water supply systems. William Condrell, writing in the Timber
     Tax Journal, October 1970, also discusses how Section 175 of the Internal
     Revenue Code lets "farmers" expense soil and water conservation, and Sec-
     tion 182 lets them expense land clearing.
52 Via defaulting on non-recourse loans. Forbes, Aug. 15, 1974, pp. 40-41.
    "The Numbers Game."
53 "Combining with capital" refers to producing durable improvements. These
     might be for personal use or for later resale with capital gains treatment. Both
     are common.
54 James W. Thompson and Edgar N. Johnson, An Introduction to Medieval
    Europe (New York: W. W. Norton & Company), 1937, pp. 293-95.
55 An exception may be poultry. That is, however, very unusual. It is part of a
    general bias for agriculture inherent in cash basis accounting allowed for
     livestock.
56 I.R.S., Tax Guide for Small Businesses, Pub. No. 334, (1965 ed.), p. 26.
57 There are several points in tax law, besides those already noted, where excess
    depreciation is recaptured using a sliding scale where the amount recaptured
    declines with the number of years before sale.
58 A good popular summary is Jeanne Dangerfield, "Sowing the Till," The Con-
    gressional Record 119 (1974); 59247-55 (May 16, 1973). A more establish-
     mentarian but less forthright statement is National Planning Association,
     The Effect of Federal Income Taxes on the Structure of Agriculture (Wash-
     ington, 1972).
59 Hendrik Houthakker, "The Great Farm Tax Mystery," Challenge, Jan.-Feb.
    1967, pp. 12-13, 38-39.
60 Liquor of course is highly taxed outside the income tax, by excises, but the
     excise tax levied upon sale has a bias for longevity, and greatly favors Scotch,
     maturing in 10 years, over Vodka, which can age in the bottle in as little as
     10 days.
61 In fairness to Terborgh, many of his writings advocate faster replacement.
62 The Warren, Gorham and Lamont Report, Sept. 9, 1974, sec. 2, p. 3; "Pen-
     sions: The Reformation Begins," Newsweek, Sept. 24, 1974, pp. 98-99.
63 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, pp. 338, 341, 349.
64 J. S. Mill, Principles of Political Economy (Boston: Lee S. Shepard, 1872),
     pp. 41-63, passim. See also J. S. Mill, Essays on Some Unsettled Issues of
    Political Economy (London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer, 1874),
     pp. 55-59.
65 Wicksell, Lectures on Political Economy, pp. 194-96.
66 K. Wicksell, Value, Capital and Rent, trans. S. H. Frowein (London:
     G. Allen & Irwin, 1954), p. 127.
67 Ibid., p. 160.
68 He credited it to Böhm-Bawerk, who however expounded it very round-
     aboutly, if not obscurely.
166                                                       LAND USE EFFECTS

69 7.273 years, to be more exact.
70 Instead of K = FP, the proper formula is now

               K=F e'—1          FP
71 "Why Ma Bell Constantly Needs More Money," Business Week, March 25,
    1972, pp. 57-58.
72 Ibid.
73 In Practice, "investment" is used very loosely by macroeconomists for spend-
     ing on durables, without careful distinctions of net and gross, as the logic
     would require. No careful effort at all is made to estimate real depreciation,
     the problem being buried by using GNP instead of national income.
74 Cecil Woodham-Smith, The Great Hunger (New York: A Signet Book, 1964),
     pp. 137-60 and passim.
75 These are covered in Gaifney, Extractive Resources and Taxation, pp. 391 if.
76 "Second thoughts that threaten the breeder," Business Week, Aug. 24, 1974,
    p. 21.
77 "Project Independence Will Cost a Bundle," Business Week, Aug. 24, 1974,
    p. 24.
78 "Why Housing Still Feels the Crunch," Business Week, Aug. 17, 1974, p. 50.
79                 In modern industry, Research
                   Has become a kind of church
                   Where rubber-aproned acolytes
                   Perform the ceremonial rites
                   And firms spend funds they do not hafter
                   In hope of benefits hereafter.
                                             —K. Boulding
80 Yoram Barzel, "Optimal Timing of Innovations," RE&S, 50(3):348-55 (Aug.
      1968).
81 Ironically, the data come from Joel Barlow of Covington and Burling that
     British taxes bear lighter on capital than do those of other major capitalist
     nations. Joel Barlow, "The Tax Law Bias against Investment in Production
     Facilities," NTJ 26 (3): 415-31, at pp. 432-33.
82 (9) may be derived from (1 + 5) e111 = R + 5, which simply says we put in
     land at the beginning and get it back at the end, along with the mature tree.
83 Note in passing that when S is large relative to planting cost (here equal to
     one), most of the capital is geogenic (land-derived). Some reforestation is
     entirely voluntary and geogenic, representing no labor at all.        -
84 The lives of cattle are foreshortened in the U.S.A. as compared with Argen-
    tina, where rangeland and cash grain are cheaper, for example. But in
     Western Europe and Japan, lives are even shorter, if cattle are grown at all.
85 Matthew Gaifney, Jr., John Hoven, and Steve Hanke helped refine this proof.
     Further discussion of this and related points are in the writer's "Tax-induced
     Slow Turnover of Capital."
