    A Real-Assets Model of Economic Crises:
           Will China Crash in 2015?
                                By MASON GAFFNEY*

ABSTRACT. Loosely derived from Henry George’s theory that land
speculation creates boom-bust cycles, a real-assets model of economic
crises is developed. In this model, land prices play a central role, and
three hypothesized mechanisms are proposed by which swings of land
prices affect the entire economy: construction on marginal sites, partial
displacement of circulating capital by fixed capital investment, and the
over-leveraging of bank assets. The crisis of 2008 is analyzed in these
terms along with other examples of sudden economic contractions in
U.S. history, recent European experience, and global examples over the
past 20 years. Conditions in China in 2014 are examined and shown to
indicate a likely recession in that country in 2015 because its banks are
over-leveraged with large-scale, under-performing real estate loans.
Finally, alternative methods of preventing similar crises in the future are
explored.



                                      Introduction

Concern about economic instability is understandably limited in the
minds of most people to their own country. Thus, the economic and
financial contraction in the United States that began in 2008 has been
the object of most interest to American economists. When they make
comparisons, the experience of the United States in the 1930s tends to
be the primary event that is viewed as parallel to the current crisis.
   A general theory of the business cycle or economic instability should
not be derived from or tested solely by two events. If a theory is valid, it


   *Professor of economics emeritus at University of California, Riverside. Email: m.
gaffney@dslextreme.com. Author of After the Crash: Designing a Depression-Free
Economy (2009) and The Corruption of Economics. The latter examines how econom-
ics was historically distracted from its potential to create models of an economy based
on both efficiency and equity.
American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 74, No. 2 (March, 2015).
DOI: 10.1111/ajes.12093
C 2015 American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Inc.
V
326      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

should apply to numerous cases in the past and, ideally, it would serve
as the basis for predicting future cycles of boom and bust, growth and
decline. We cannot, like scientists in a laboratory, create the conditions
we wish to study, but economists can attempt to be more scientific than
we have been until now by examining as many cases as possible from
many countries and time periods.
   This article will begin with a conceptual model that first offers an
explanation of numerous panics, crashes, or crises in the history of the
United States. It will then discuss its relevance to recent expansion and
contractions in several European economies. Finally, it will analyze the
prospective problems facing the Chinese economy in 2015, with the
hope of demonstrating the value of this model for prediction, not
merely description. By applying the model to a number of different cir-
cumstances, I hope to show that it is a universal model, capable of
explaining cycles of economic expansion and contraction throughout
the world.
   The theory presented here derives from a simple model developed
by Henry George ([1879] 1979: BK V, Ch. 1). George blamed the peri-
odic “paroxysms” in modern economies on the effects of land specula-
tion. In his view, if enough people held land off the market in the hope
of a price increase, the resulting artificial scarcity of land would raise
rents and land prices, driving down wages and returns to productive
investment. Eventually, this process would reach a limit, land prices
would fall, workers would be laid off, and factories would close. We
should give George credit for seeing the general outlines of this pro-
cess, but we must elaborate on his ideas to incorporate elements other
than land prices. I have elsewhere presented a thorough explanation of
the model developed below (Gaffney 2009), so I shall merely summa-
rize it here.



                            General Theory

To make sense of what happened to China in 2014 and the United
States in 2008 and 1927, we must shift our attention away from the
details of each crisis and attempt to detect, amid the noise and varying
particulars, a general pattern of economic crisis. I will develop here a
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                     327

“real-assets” model or theory that will be useful in understanding that
pattern. The hypothesis here has four elements:

  1. A rise and fall of land prices, resulting mostly from autonomous
     real economic changes. These are less visible and less measura-
     ble than purely monetary and fiscal changes, which may reflect
     and even reinforce the real changes but not initiate them,
  2. Investment in projects at the margins, both in terms of geo-
     graphic location and value,
  3. Concomitant changes in the structure of capital investment to
     favor structures with long payout periods, and
  4. An increase in bank leverage ratios as a result of lower capital
     turnover, leaving many banks technically in default by the time
     the land price bubble bursts.


                           Land Price Changes

The present hypothesis begins a posteriori from observing land prices
increasing over a period of five to eight years after a trough. This con-
trasts to common scenarios that cast the banking system as the autono-
mous factor initiating economic crises. Once price increments begin to
seem the normal, “rational” expectation, staid banks and other financial
institutions turn to lending on land collateral, and expand their balance
sheets to accommodate the increased investment in real estate. But
banks are responding to an external stimulus (an apparent improve-
ment in the value of real estate) rather than creating the conditions for a
boom on their own. It is only in the late stages of the land price boom
that banks, when they are lending money on increasingly marginal
sites, must develop creative accounting methods to circumvent the
financial regulations that were put in place during a previous period of
contraction to prevent reckless lending.
   The first sign of a new cycle of boom and bust is a self-generated rise
in land prices, which shows up in the form of higher priced houses.
When we speak of an increase in housing prices, what we really mean
is the change in the price of urban land on which the houses are built.
Since the actual housing stock depreciates over time, it makes no sense
to conflate the two. If the price of housing rises 8 percent, the price of
328      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

land must have increased by, say, 15 or even 20 percent to account for
the stability or decline of the portion of value invested in physical
capital.
   A land price occurs naturally as a result of increased economic pro-
ductivity or, often enough, a period of “peace dividends” following a
major war. For the first few years after a crash, the land market remains
unnoticeable. Buyers are wary of investing in real estate immediately,
and banks are even warier of lending for that purpose. In addition,
banks are unable to lend much because they have to retrench in order
to lower their leverage ratios. Nevertheless, four or five years after a
crash, land prices will start creeping back upward as a result of general
economic growth. Initially, that will cause an increase in the price of
existing houses. (Actually, the price change will represent an increase
in the value of sites, not the buildings, which are depreciating, becom-
ing obsolescent, and often being replaced at lower cost.) Increases in
real estate prices will signal to home builders and commercial real
estate developers that the time has come to build new homes and offi-
ces. At that point, perhaps 10 to 12 years after the last crash, a new
speculative boom begins. At this point, the rise in land prices acceler-
ates because a rise stimulates more investment, which stimulates a
faster price increase, and so on. This occurs first in residential markets,
followed closely by commercial and industrial (C&I) real estate. Land
price appreciation becomes noticeably higher than alternative invest-
ments, and a frenzy takes hold in which more and more people imag-
ine they can make money without effort by investing in real estate.
Many of those caught up in a frenzy fancy they are the rational ones, as
revealed by the phrases they publish, like Fisher’s “permanently high
plateau” of prices, and Sargent’s “rational expectations,” and Will
Rogers’s “Buy land, they ain’t makin’ any more of it!”
   The rise in land prices must eventually reach a limit. The ratio of loan
repayments to cash flow (and service flow) eventually becomes high
enough, even to the point of exceeding unity, to reverse the speculative
frenzy and cause a sell-off. There is a plateau at the peak, as owners
who bought for short-term gain are now reluctant to take a loss, so as
the market softens, bid prices fall faster than asking prices, and sales
slow down for a few years. According to the S&P/Case-Shiller Home
Price Index (2014), the index of home prices hovered at 206 from June
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                     329

to August 2006 (January 2000 5 100), before beginning a decline to 139
in April 2009. (The price of land is more volatile than home prices, since
the relative price stability of the housing stock moderates the combined
price of land and housing.1) Once prices start to fall, some speculators
begin selling quickly, accepting declining bids in order to avoid holding
property in a falling market. Others, with greater holdout power and
more sanguine expectations, settle in for the long wait, hoping prices
will recover. The price of land—those few parcels that do sell—then
starts to fall faster than it rose. Land prices may crash in two or more
waves, the housing market leading the commercial market by about
two years, as happened 1927–1929 and 2006–2008.
   If there were a national land price index, it would be possible to
demonstrate this pattern. In the absence of such an index, we can use
data on construction from the U.S. Census Bureau (2012, 2014a).2 The
value of residential construction rose 95 percent from 2000 (annual
average) to March 2006, then declined by 66 percent by February 2011.
A similar phenomenon occurred in nonresidential construction, which
includes not only commercial, industrial, and service-sector construc-
tion, but also infrastructure such as roads and sewer lines, harbors, and
airports. From June 2002 to November 2008, it rose 232 percent, then
fell 29 percent by May 2011. There was a lag of 32 months between the
peak of housing construction (March 2006) and the peak of
nonresidential construction (November 2008).
   National data on government gross investment in fixed assets
(around 20 percent of private investment) shows much less volatility
than private investment, which is surprising, given the importance of
local infrastructure investment in fueling a boom and the immediate
depreciation of abandoned public infrastructure after a crash. However,
the absence of volatility in aggregate data may simply reveal the rela-
tively small number of cities affected by “irrational exuberance” that
can create a national economic crisis. National data may obscure what
is going on in key local economies. There are also temporal idiosyncra-
cies, varying with the ideologies of politicians. Thus the canal boom of
1820–1840 was a nationwide mania in spite of President Jackson’s
refusal to use federal funds directly. This is an area for future research.
   Note that in the case of housing, the peak of construction in 2000–
2008 occurred three to five months before the peak of the S&P house
330       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

price index. This would suggest that housing starts might represent a
leading indicator of an impending contraction in the economy.
   The same pattern of successive waves of housing and nonresidential
construction cycles can be found in the 1920s, indicating that this model
is useful in explaining the Great Depression as well as the most recent
crisis. The value of housing construction rose 167 percent from 1921 to
1926, then declined 93 percent by 1933 (U.S. Census Bureau 1975a:
Column N32). Nonresidential construction rose 93 percent from 1921 to
$2.7 billion in 1929, then fell 85 percent by 1933 (U.S. Census Bureau
1975a: Column N36). The peaks of residential and nonresidential con-
struction were thus around three years apart. Add to that, housing pri-
ces peaked in 1927, two or three years before stock prices did in late
1929.
   Of course, a rise and decline in housing construction is not a perfect
proxy for changes in land prices, but it is a good approximation. A large
increase in housing construction occurs during the boom phase of the
land price cycle because (a) building and selling houses is one way to
generate immediate revenue from rising land prices, and (b) rising land
prices generally encourage investment in capital with low turnover (as
will be explained below). Since there are no land price indices in the
United States and most other countries, construction data must serve as a
proxy in following the economic events that lead up to a financial crisis.


                    Use of Marginal Sites During Booms

During an economic boom, as land prices are rising, an immediate
effect is hoarding of good locations. If land prices are expected to rise
at 20 percent per year, and other investments yield only 10 percent,
owners have an incentive to hold land off the market until the growth
of land prices falls below the return on alternatives. Although some
properties are “flipped” multiple times during a period of rising land
prices, other sites remain idle or underdeveloped while the owner
waits. Since that process occurs on many of the most desirable loca-
tions, land on the margins of a city will benefit from the artificial scarcity
of better locations and the rise in land prices.
   As a result of bottlenecks in the use of sites, boom periods lead to
speculative investment in housing and office buildings in marginal
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                       331

areas of a city: sites on the urban periphery, sites with hazards like
flood, fire, windstorms, quakes, and unstable ground subject to lique-
faction. The market signals that these sites are suddenly valuable, and
developers respond with new projects. There is a reason these areas
are marginal.
   A higher than average proportion of the households or businesses
that purchase or lease the new construction lack the cash flow required
to make their payments to the developers. When the land price bubble
bursts, foreclosures become commonplace. Highly-leveraged builders
are then also forced into foreclosure, leaving office buildings or hous-
ing tracts uncompleted or unoccupied: “Hayeks” in the 1920s; “The
Empty State” building in 1930s Manhattan, and “orphan subdivisions”
around Chicago and Detroit; “see-through” buildings in 1988 in Dallas
and Denver. In addition, the dispersal of development when the econ-
omy is experiencing “irrational exuberance” creates a drag on the econ-
omy to the extent that economic activity becomes less geographically
concentrated. Extensive development beyond the limits of ordinary
(non-speculative) economic activity is inefficient and raises transporta-
tion and linkage costs of many kinds. Thus, land price rises cause
geographically inefficient investment.


                    Changing Characteristics of Capital

Although speculative growth of land prices and investment in marginal
locations are the initial factors that lead to major episodes of economic
instability, a proximate cause of crisis is a shift that occurs in the nature
of capital investment. The net effect is to increase the average payback
period of capital investments, which creates instability in the banking
system. Raising the average length of loan retirement has effects on
other economic variables, such as reducing employment opportunities,
a question we shall return to later.
   In the following section, we will explain the effects of capital length-
ening on the financial sector of the economy. In this section, we will
consider only the process by which rising land prices lead to this
phenomenon.
   Circular (positive feedback) effect. The first relationship of land and
capital is a circular process whereby the development of marginal
332       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

locations lowers the rate of return on productive investments. That rein-
forces the advantage of further investment in land, which fuels this
cycle. Potential developers buy more land than is necessary for current
development plans because they are reacting defensively to the antici-
pation of higher prices. This biases investment still further. What looks
like a virtuous cycle to the individual who invests in land looks like a
vicious circle to businesses that produce things of value and that lose
their financing to those caught up in a land-buying frenzy. Net effect:
More investment in land, less in physical capital.
    Price effect. The second consequence of rising land prices on capital
investment is a price effect. As the price of land rises relative to construc-
tion materials, builders will substitute capital goods (mostly buildings
and equipment) for land. (Alfred Marshall ([1890] 1920: Appendix G)
foresaw this clearly.). This is a price effect that occurs whenever the rela-
tive price of inputs changes. As we have already seen from the statistics
cited above, as the relative price of construction materials falls compared
to land prices, developers will engage in a flurry of construction. Nothing
is ever quite that simple, to be sure, since building materials like metals
and lumber and cement are land-intensive in their own production, but
the net effect is: Less investment in land, more in physical capital.
    Wealth effect. The third effect of rising land prices is a wealth effect,
according to which landowners feel richer than before and spend at
least part of the rise in value of their paper assets. The wealth effect is
either inflationary, if no value is produced in conjunction with higher
spending, or simply destructive of capital, if consumption displaces
saving. Net effect: Saving declines, as illusory income is spent on con-
sumption goods.
    Sprawl Effect. A fourth effect is the capital cost of sprawl (scattered
settlement). Scattering a given population over more space calls for lon-
ger roads, pipes, wires, canals, and all kinds of connective capital, plus
more vehicles, more fuels with wells and mines and refineries. It is a
long list that the reader can supplement. The land idled in hollowed-
out cities may be replaced by suburbs and exurbs and whole counties
filled with dachas and their connective infrastructure.
    What is the net effect of all of these complex interactions? To find an
answer, we must first distinguish between two types of capital, which
are actually differences along a continuum, not distinct categories.
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                      333

However, for the sake of simplicity, we will refer to them as “circulating
capital” and “fixed capital.” We draw the distinction sharply here to
emphasize that not all capital investment is alike and that the behavior
of land markets strongly influences which kind of capital will dominate
investment.
   Circulating capital here stands for a one-time investment that quickly
generates revenue that can be reinvested again and again. In other
words, it is capital (K) with high turnover. We can think of turnover (T)
as the number of times capital is recouped in a year or some other time
period. It is the reciprocal of the payout period (P), or the time required
to produce enough value to fully recoup the original investment.
   For example, a children’s lemonade stand with a $2 investment (K) in
lemons and sugar at the start of the day might yield $10 in revenue. In
that case, T is 5 because the capital turns over five times in one day, and
P is 1/5 of a day. In a small convenience store, if K is $100,000 ($50,000
for initial payroll and $50,000 for inventory), T might be 12, so the flow
of capital (F) would be 12 3 $100,000 5 $1,200,000. We assume here
that the revenue in each payout period (one month) is sufficient to pay
for wages, inventory replacement, and other operating costs.
   In general, capital investment (K) times turnover (T) equals the flow
of capital (F) or KT 5 F. For a given level of investment, the higher the
turnover and flow, the more will be available to hire labor. If the inven-
tory in this hypothetical convenience store turned over only twice a
year, the flow would be only $100,000, which is also the amount that
would be available to pay wages and other costs. Thus, the ability of
capital to sustain labor is as much a question of turnover as it is the size
of the capital stock.
   If that sounds novel to modern ears it is a sign of retrogression in eco-
nomic thinking: Adam Smith, David Ricardo, Knut Wicksell, and before
them, Turgot spelled it out clearly in their classic works.
   Fixed capital here refers to capital that yields value slowly and thus
turns over slowly. It is typified by a house, office building, or factory,
where capital turns over only once every 40 years (or more). (Thus T 5
1/40 or 0.025.) Since interest is the primary cost of a long-term invest-
ment, a given level of capital yields a dramatically reduced flow, so that
KT > F. For a 40-year loan at 8 percent interest, 70 percent of payments
are for interest, and only 30 percent are available to yield net value of
334      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

production.3 Even with an interest rate of only 4 percent or a building
life of 20 years, interest would still claim 50 percent of total payments.
Thus, in the case of fixed capital, interest drives a wedge between initial
investment and the production of value. The lower the turnover (or,
equivalently, the longer the payout period) the more capital is diverted
into simply maintaining itself rather than combining with labor to add
value. If fixed capital becomes too large a portion of total capital in use,
this imposes a drag on the entire economy.
   This brings us back to the question of land prices. When land prices
start to rise during a boom, investments in circulating capital are shifted
to fixed capital. The latter now suddenly seems more profitable
than mundane investments in the circulating capital of productive
enterprises. This illusion of highly profitable construction is created by
conflating the increase in land values with returns on construction, an
easy mistake to make since revenues do not announce themselves as
payments for location as opposed to structures. In fact, the return on
construction will be negative for many buildings produced in a boom
period, since construction on marginal land is often abandoned or
delayed for many years. As in a Ponzi scheme, some early construction
investments may turn out to be profitable, but much of the capital
invested in construction is simply wasted, gone forever.
   The dissipation of private investment on fixed capital is matched by
the equally foolish investment of public funds in similar projects. Even
where private developers pay for infrastructure within the area of their
project, local governments pay for later maintenance and often pay for
utility pipes, arterial roads, and other amenities years in advance of
actual development. If the development never takes place and the
developer goes bankrupt, cities and counties may be faced with
massive debt that yields no return, so they must reduce spending on
other services to repay it.
   From a macroeconomic standpoint, there is no difference between
public and private borrowing and the resulting debt overhang. In both
cases, the investment in fixed capital, particularly in cases where repay-
ment stops or is delayed, creates a severe drag on the economy because
productive enterprises are starved for financing for several years. That
is why so many small businesses face bankruptcy in the early stages of
economic contraction.
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                      335

                           Overextended Banks

The final element in the real assets theory of economic crisis is the pro-
cess by which banks become overextended and highly leveraged.
Banks are the public face of economic crises because their lending
behavior during a boom adds fuel to the fire and their foreclosure on
borrowers during the contraction phase adds to the drama that makes
them seem like the villains.
   Banks are always heavily leveraged, meaning their reserves are a
small percent of their loans. Leverage enables banks to profit during
boom periods because the value of their assets seems to be rising in the
form of the real estate they hold as collateral. But eventually, the price
of real estate reaches a peak and begins to fall. At that point, the value
of bank assets is put in danger. Everyone tries to sell their real estate at
the same time, but that just drives the price down further. When bor-
rowers cannot repay their loans or choose to abandon property that is
“under water” (worth less than the loan on it), the bank takes the prop-
erty that was held as collateral. Now banks have a lot of low valued
property that they cannot sell. Their reserves become tied to these illi-
quid (unsellable) assets, so they can no longer lend money to small
businesses for their operational expenses. As a result, bankruptcies rise
dramatically.
   The price of land could not rise during a speculative binge unless
banks and other financial intermediaries were willing to lend money
against inflated collateral values. Bankers thus contribute to the specu-
lative process by expanding their balance sheets and knowingly lever-
aging their assets beyond the bounds of good business practice,
sometimes to the point of criminality. Creating subprime mortgages
and lending money to families that banks knew would not be able to
repay their loans was not an innovation in the 2000s. The same policy
was put into practice during the 1920s, but it was called “shoestring
financing” then. In addition, lobbyists for the banking industry per-
suaded the U.S. Congress to overturn the Glass-Steagal Act, which was
adopted during the Great Depression to separate commercial and
investment banking. Enabling the same banks to perform both opera-
tions permitted them to turn normal mortgages into collateralized
mortgage obligations, through which they cut up mortgages of various
336      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

levels of risk and repackaged them for sale as investment instruments.
When land prices dropped, and those assets fell far below their face
value (thereby becoming “toxic”), it was nearly impossible to hold
mortgage lenders accountable for their irresponsible lending.
   Although a few investment bankers profited handsomely by putting
the global economy at risk, other banks such as Lehman Brothers
gambled and lost. Many commercial banks that participated in the
euphoria of making money from rising land values also created the
conditions of their own illiquidity. For the year ending June 1, 2010,
Goldman Sachs showed a 24.5 percent return on equity, but during the
same period, the return for all banks was only 3.5 percent, far below
the S&P average of 14.5 percent (Reuters 2010). By 2014, when the
return for all banks had risen to 10.2 percent, the five-year average for
banks was 4.7 percent, suggesting a very slow recovery in the banking
sector (Reuters 2014). Even those figures exaggerate the health of banks
in the wake of the crisis. If banks were required to “mark to market”
(assign current market value to their real estate assets), large numbers
of seemingly healthy banks would have been bankrupt in 2010, mean-
ing their liabilities would have exceeded their assets and their equity
would have been negative.
   In summary, the real-assets theory of crisis views the disorganized
activities of land speculators and the organized activities of ambitious
bankers as equal partners in fomenting the cycle of boom and bust.
They work in tandem to freeze capital in forms that take years to thaw,
thereby undermining the flexibility of the economy and the banking
system at the same time.


                         Comparative History

We now have the outline of a real-assets theory of economic crisis
that can explain major periods of expansion and contraction in any
economy in which land is exchanged through impersonal, monetized
markets. Feudal and modern socialist command economies lack that
characteristic. Thus, the model predicts that, whereas they may have
suffered low productivity and short-term business cycle problems due
to production bottlenecks, they should not have experienced the sorts
of dramatic swings to which modern market economies are subject.
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                    337

   Market economies have, however, experienced cycles of boom and
bust for centuries. In the United States, peaks occurred in 1797, 1817,
1836, 1857, 1872, 1893, 1909, 1928, 1957, 1973, 1989, and 2006. There
are individual studies of a number of these panics, although few econo-
mists have noted that they have common characteristics and occur with
regularity every generation. As Carmen M. Reinhart (2010) has noted:
“The economics profession has an unfortunate tendency to view recent
experience in the narrow window provided by standard datasets. With
a few notable exceptions, cross-country empirical studies of financial
crises typically begin in 1980 and are limited in other important
respects. Yet an event that is rare in a three-decade span may not be all
that rare when placed in a broader context.” The “South Sea Bubble” of
1720 is well known. Before that was the Dutch “Tulip Bubble.” One
French historian has documented cycles as far back as the 12th century
(Levasseur 1893).
   One piece of evidence of a common pattern has already been pre-
sented: the similarity of the successive rise and fall of home building
and nonresidential construction, approximately two to three years
apart. For the United States, there is some statistical evidence that that
pattern can be traced further into the past, although the data become
murkier the further back we go. In the decades before the Great
Depression, the peaks in the value of housing construction occurred in
1892 and 1909, in each case followed by a drop of more than 20 per-
cent in the following year. In 1892, the peak in residential and nonresi-
dential construction coincided, whereas in 1909, the nonresidential
peak followed by one year, in 1910 (U.S. Census Bureau 1975b: Col-
umns 73, 75). This confirms the real-assets theory, but it raises doubts
about the generality of the pattern by which nonresidential peak con-
struction occurs two or three years after the peak in residential con-
struction. A theoretical explanation for this variation is called for, but
we offer none here. This is another area for further study.
   Hoyt (1933) offers further empirical evidence that land values peak
immediately prior to major depressions, and he extends this analysis
back to 1835. He does this by focusing on a single city: Chicago. In this
case study, he was able to gather data on actual land values rather than
having to rely on proxies such as the value of construction. Hoyt (1933:
348) shows land value peaks in 1836, 1856, 1872, 1891, and 1928,
338       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

                                   Table 1
      Value of Chicago Land by Category (millions of dollars)
Year      Loop      Outlying Business       Residential     Industrial     Total

1910        600              200                 500           200        1,500
1928      1,000            1,333               2,267           400        5,000
1933        500              300               1,000           200        2,000

followed by a decline in land prices of at least 50 percent in all but one
case (1872), when prices fell “only” 33 percent.
   In addition to confirming the general hypothesis that land value peaks
precede depressions, Hoyt (1933: 347) also reveals the differential pattern
within a city. Table 1 shows the value of land in Chicago in 1910, 1928,
and 1933 according to usage categories: the Loop (central business dis-
trict), outlying business districts, residential, industrial, and total (citywide
average). The data clearly show that land values shift to more peripheral
locations during boom periods and contract more severely in those same
areas after a crash. Thus, land values in the central business district did
not even double from 1910 to 1928, but land for housing and outlying
business districts grew by a factor of 4.5 and 6.7, respectively. The subse-
quent crash was also much greater in outlying areas. This shows that the
volatility of land prices is in newly-developed marginal lands.
   The central business district contained only 0.1 percent of the land in
Chicago’s borders in 1933, and yet it held at least 20 percent of the city’s
land value during most of its first century of expansion. The percentage
fell during boom periods, when the bubble in land values in outlying
areas took place, but it rose during periods of recovery when periph-
eral land values fell faster and further than inner-ring land values did.
(Simpson and Burton (1931) elaborated on this phenomenon and pro-
vided one inspiration for Hoyt’s work.)
   In England, for example, between 1892 and 1926, the average price
per acre of residential land rose from £130 in the first four years to £950
in the following period, fell again to £130 in the next five-year period,
rose to an average of £400 for five years, and finally fell to £210, £150,
and £140, in the final three periods of seven, five, and five years,
respectively (Harrison 1983: 95, citing Vallis 1972: 1209, Table II).
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                        339

   The experience of other nations also fits the pattern. In the 1990s,
Mexico, Chile, Thailand, and Malaysia experienced economic crises that
were reported to have been caused by rapid influxes of “hot money” that
drove up prices, followed by equally sudden withdrawals of cash that
left their economies short of credit and unable to pay debts. Most of the
analysis in English about these crises was conducted by economists who
were trained in international economics, and who apply financial analy-
sis to every economic problem. In effect, they were trained to pay atten-
tion to monetary flows and to ignore the effects of changes in land
values. One searches in vain to find more than a passing reference to
land values in their discussions of those crises.
   Felix (1987) offers a refreshing exception to that rule. Analyzing the
Baring Crisis in Argentina in 1890, he makes clear that the problem was
not one of financial impropriety but rather a process of growing expect-
ations of cashing in on growing land values, with no end in sight. Felix
(1987: 8) describes the situation as it unfolded:

  The 1880s boom was deeply marred by . . . the inability of markets to signal
  accurately the limits of [the extension of capital over the landscape and by]
  . . . project promoters and security brokers, who [could] gull outsiders into
  continuing to feed the boom in asset values.. . . Railroad trackage rose from
  twenty-eight hundred miles in 1885 to seventy-two hundred miles in 1891,
  with thousands of additional miles under construction when the debt crisis
  exploded, yet freight tonnage rose only 28 percent.

  In short, this was a crisis created by premature investment in mar-
ginal assets based on false expectations about the capacity of those
assets to yield revenue.
  Another exception to the practice of ignoring the significance of land
bubbles is a paper by Gabriel Palma on regional economic crises in the
1990s. Although his paper is on the need for capital controls to prevent
externally-driven rapid fluctuations in a nation’s money supply, he pro-
vides detailed evidence of a connection between real estate bubbles
and subsequent economic collapse in Chile, Mexico, and Malaysia. In
Mexico, Palma (2000: 19, 21) indicates that land prices rose 600 percent
before the 1994 crisis, and residential construction doubled in five
years, while investments in machinery, equipment, and infrastructure
were cut in half. In Chile, a real estate price index rose by a factor of
340       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

10 in six years, and in Malaysia, real estate prices jumped by a factor of
5.5 from 1992 to 1997 (Palma 2000: 41, 47–48). When land prices came
down in each country, banks were left with nonperforming loans on
property they acquired through defaults. Nevertheless, this source of
economic instability is less visible than the international investments
that first financed the bubbles and then were withdrawn when trouble
came. Since similar troubles have occurred where capital flows are
more domestic than international (in the United States, for example), it
is dubious to blame the crisis on peculiarities of international flows.
The underlying problem is the land market itself.
   The same is true of the most recent economic crisis. It is interesting
to look at the countries where there was a rapid increase in land prices
(using housing prices as a proxy) during the years before 2008. Accord-
ing to Montagu-Pollock (2014), the following jurisdictions experienced
growth of housing prices of at least 100 percent during the decade
before 2008 or a comparable increase over a longer period: Denmark
(>200% from 1993 to 2007), Finland (100% from 1997 to 2008), Paris,
France (160% from 1998 to 2008), Greece (225% from 1993 to 2007),
Hong Kong (175%), Indonesia (100% from 2000 to 2008), Ireland
(320% from 1996 to 2007), Italy (100%), Norway (240% from 1994 to
2007), Serbia (300%), Singapore (40%), Slovak Republic (100%), Slov-
enia (100%), Spain (100%), Sweden (150% from 1998 to 2008), Ukraine
(140%), and the United States (100% from 1996 to 2006).
   It is interesting to note that Spain, Greece, and Ireland, the three
countries that suffered the most severe crises in the Eurozone, are on
the list. They reveal how falling land prices can affect the entire econ-
omy by both slowing down the construction sector and by tying up
bank loans with toxic real estate. According to Eurostat (2014a),
Ireland’s house prices were cut in half between 2007 and 2013, Spain’s
fell 37 percent from the first quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of
2014, while Greece’s prices remained stable, which strongly suggests
that the data in this Eurostat table are incorrect. As a result, the value of
building construction fell by 73 percent in Ireland (2008–2011) and 77
percent in Spain (2007–2013). This table has no data for Greece, which
will be addressed below.
   In Spain, Stucklin (2012) points out that planning approvals for new
home developments are down 93 percent compared to the 2006 peak.
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                      341

Just as Hoyt (1933) found the greatest land price volatility in outlying
areas of Chicago, Harris (2013) summarizes a Spanish Ministry of Devel-
opment report that indicates land prices fell furthest along the northern
coast of Spain and in villages of less than 1,000 people.
   Since the widely-discussed economic woes of Greece were attributed
entirely to its large public deficit for several years after 2009, let us
examine the evidence more closely to determine if land price changes
(boom and bust) were indeed a major factor in its ongoing crisis. Koo
(2012: 8), citing Bank of Greece data, observes that house prices in
Greece rose by a factor of 1.6 (from 100 to 260 on a house-price index)
from 1997 to 2008. The Bank of Greece (2014: Table II.7) shows apart-
ment prices in various cities in Greece falling by around 30–35 percent
from 2008 to 2013. In addition, building construction in Greece fell by
86 percent from 2007 to 2013 in Greece (calculated from Eurostat
2014c). The spiraling downward of the Greek economy in the wake of
this crisis has left 27 percent unemployment. These are precisely the
sorts of statistics of rising and falling land prices (via proxies) that one
would expect if the crisis was precipitated by land speculation. Of
course, the severity of the crisis in Greece was compounded by its fiscal
deficit, but the structural weakening of the economy was a product of
land market volatility. Sampaniotis (2011: 27), an analyst at Eurobank
Ergasias, is simply mistaken when he concludes: “The real estate mar-
ket was not a problem in Greece.”
   Malzubris (2008) and other analysts of Ireland’s housing boom have
generally agreed that the Irish economic crisis was due primarily to the
increase in housing prices from 1996 to 2006, and the subsequent crash.
The experience of Ireland was extreme: house prices rose more than
four-fold (314 percent) in a decade (Economic and Social Research
Institute 2011). Irish banks now hold 95,000 home mortgages that have
been nonperforming for at least 90 days; they constitute almost 12 per-
cent of all mortgages in Ireland (Phillips 2013; Castle 2013). Even if the
banks foreclosed (which Irish law has effectively prevented), the banks
would gain little: most of the bad loans would simply become toxic
assets in the banks’ portfolios. That would not help the banks with their
very low capital ratios (equity/asset ratios). With their cash tied up in
housing capital that is not turning over (being repaid), Ireland faces a
serious, long-term liquidity crisis of the sort that Japan has lived with
342      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

ever since its land boom came to an end in 1990. Bailout loans have
avoided a complete economic collapse in Ireland, but they have only
delayed the reckoning.
   We have emphasized here only the most recent examples of how the
speculative growth and decline of land prices affects economic perform-
ance. The data for fully testing the real-assets model of economic insta-
bility are almost nonexistent because governments tend to collect data
only if there is a model that requires it. (For that reason, the Keynesian
model, which requires estimates of aggregate demand and supply, could
only be tested after World War II, when governments began collecting
the necessary data.) A handful of governments recently began collecting
aggregate national information on housing prices, but only a few collect
data on land prices. As we have seen from Hoyt’s intensive examination
of Chicago, the data should also distinguish between land prices in the
central business district and in outlying areas, and between commercial
and residential districts. Further refinements of the real-assets model
may reveal other distinctions that would improve its predictive power.
For the time, it seems we must remain content to accept data on housing
prices that combine land and building prices and mask the differences in
the rate and direction of change of each element.


                           The Case of China

China presents an unusual opportunity for testing the real-assets model
of macroeconomic instability because it has not yet experienced a full-
blown bubble followed by a crash. Nevertheless, as I write this in the
fall of 2014, the Chinese economy appears to be entering a period of
economic contraction, with investment capital drying up and ceasing to
finance the kinds of projects that have been the engine of growth in
China for several decades. Those who regard every major economic
event as unique and caused by random external factors will regard as
coincidental any features in common between China’s current experi-
ence and the retrenchment of the U.S., Irish, Spanish, and Greek econo-
mies since 2008, but the real-assets model predicts the same pattern
will be found. There are, of course, differences. Whereas privately
owned banks and private capital investment are the norm in the United
States and Europe, the primary source of investment capital in China
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                    343

has come from state-owned banks. In addition, all land is owned by the
state in China, in contrast to most other countries, where individuals
and businesses own land in fee simple. Nevertheless, de facto private
ownership of land occurs in China through 70-year leases for residen-
ces and 50-year leases for most commercial purposes. As a result, the
economic fundamentals are the same, and those characteristics are
likely to supersede the differences.
   The most notable resemblance between China and crisis-afflicted
Western nations in relation to macroeconomic instability is the rapid
increase in land prices over a period of five or more years. Gyourko
et al. (2010: Figure 5) have estimated that land prices in Beijing rose
more than 750 percent from 2003 to 2010, but they are hesitant to
regard that as a price bubble, absent more complete knowledge about
China’s property markets over a longer period. (By contrast, average
housing prices in 35 cities rose only 100 percent during the same period
(Gyourko et al. 2010: Figure 1). This reveals the much higher volatility
of land prices than housing prices, as one would expect.)
   Gyourko et al. (2010) and other analysts present other evidence that
a land-price bubble had begun to form in China by 2007. For example,
Gyourko et al. (2010: Figure 3) shows a price-to-rent ratio in eight major
cities, in which the mid-point of the eight cities was around 30 from
2007 to 2010. (Previous years are not available and thus historic trends
cannot be observed because data were not collected before 2007.) By
comparison, Davis et al. (2008) show the price-to-rent ratio in the
United States rose to 30 only from 2005 to 2007, just before the bubble
burst. However, this information is not decisive, since the price-rent
and price-income ratios have only limited predictive ability in forecast-
ing price peaks and declines. Until there is evidence that they predict
over-investment in fixed capital, they function only as secondary indi-
cators of a price bubble.
   Another sign of a reversal in the housing market that will lead to a
general economic contraction in China is the buildup of housing inven-
tories. Nie and Cao (2014: 3) report this accumulation in the past two
years in China: “The average inventory-to-sales ratio—a measure of
how many months it would take to sell all existing inventory at the cur-
rent rate of sales—rose 50 percent in the past 12 months, from 12
months in June 2013 to 18 months in June 2014, a rate well above the
344      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

United States’ 5.8 months.” Nie and Cao (2014: 1) also point out that
investment in private housing in China has grown an average of 20.2
percent per year since 1998, double the rate of GDP growth, and it now
comprises 15 percent of GDP. Thus, a decline in housing construction,
almost certain, given the excessive inventory buildup, will have a large
and immediate effect on the overall growth of the Chinese economy.
   We should have learned from earlier boom-bust cycles that the seeds
of bank failure may be sown in a small number of jurisdictions. Those
jurisdictions are often not the largest cities. Thus, national averages of
land prices, house prices, and inventories, and statistics about prices in
the largest cities may not accurately warn of an impending crash, which
may come from the hinterlands. China is now famous for its “ghost cit-
ies,” massive investments in land and infrastructure that stand virtually
idle, but since there are only a handful of them, they are statistically
unimportant by themselves. Far more relevant are the thousands of
small, underutilized development projects, scattered in hundreds of
small cities and towns. Davis and Fung (2014) summarize the situation
in the large number of small- and medium-sized cities, which is pre-
cisely where trouble has been brewing.

  Evidence is mounting that in dozens of third- and fourth-tier Chinese
  cities rarely visited by foreigners, overbuilding is out of control and a
  major property-market slowdown is now under way. The 200 or so Chi-
  nese cities with populations ranging from 500,000 to several million
  account for 70% of the country’s residential-property sales. In many of
  these cities, developers are slashing prices and offering freebies such as
  kitchen furnishings and parking spaces as they try to work through vast
  gluts of unsold property. Protests are breaking out among buyers angry
  that their investments are losing value.

   Overbuilding in small cities throughout China is a much better indi-
cator of a coming decline in land prices and loss of bank liquidity than
indices that measure only the big cities. Of course, if the building boom
in Beijing, Shanghai, and Hangzhou occurs on the margins of those
cities, then their condition could contribute to a major economic rever-
sal. However, since no existing construction or price index reveals the
location of construction, that aspect of the process will remain hidden
until after the crash occurs, and the location of abandoned projects in
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                       345

major cities becomes apparent. While bad investments in the center of
a city may eventually be recovered, investments on the periphery will
normally be lost forever.
   It would also be desirable to know much more about the commercial
real estate building boom and its impending collapse. As early as 2010,
office towers were facing vacancy rates of 15–17 percent in Beijing and
13 percent in Shanghai (Colliers International 2010). That was viewed
as mildly alarming at the time. It has now become clear that the prob-
lem of excessive expansion in real estate is a national problem, particu-
larly in the mid-size cities. Frank Chen, executive director for China of
CBRE, explains that the vacancy rate in second-tier cities is 21 percent,
double the rate considered healthy (China Economic Review 2014).
FlorCruz (2014) cites an example of this phenomenon: “Chengdu, in
the southwestern province of Sichuan, embodies the problem faced by
many Chinese cities—a huge oversupply of buildings spurred by abun-
dant finance. Nearly half the offices in the city are now vacant, and the
problem is expected to worsen: More than 1.5 million square meters of
space are scheduled to be completed this year.”
   As if the rise of land values and excessive construction of housing
and commercial units were not enough, local governments in China
have also been borrowing heavily and guaranteeing loans, all to engage
in real estate developments of various kinds: to buy land or make infra-
structure improvements. According to Davis and McMahon (2013),
local government debt grew from 10.7 trillion yuan in 2010 to 17.9 tril-
lion yuan ($3 trillion) in 2013, and only a small portion of the increase
has come from conventional banks. More than 10 percent of financing
now comes from “shadow banks” and about 17 percent comes from
“other” sources. The transition from conventional sources of capital
represents a decline in the quality of the investments. Davis and
McMahon (2013) continue:

  China’s world-beating record of about 10% annual growth for the past
  three decades is based in large part on local governments spending
  heavily on such building projects. But since the global financial crisis of
  2008, that construction has depended more and more on heavy borrow-
  ing and often resulted in dead-end projects that have a tough time pay-
  ing their bills, economists say. Nearly half of the debt comes due by the
  end of 2014.
346       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

   The reference to “dead-end projects” is a good indicator of the falling
quality of local government investments. It points toward the problems
that arise when marginal sites are being developed during a boom,
locations that cannot generate enough revenue to repay loans.
   As Das (2014) explains, 90 percent of bank loans since 2008 were
invested in fixed assets, particularly by state-owned enterprises. The
result has been a total debt held by government, corporations, and
households of around 200–250 percent of GDP. Local government debt
is around 25 percent of the total, and its share of the total has increased
substantially since 2008. But, Das continues, official debt statistics do
not include various off-budget forms of debt, such as “nonperforming
loans purchased from state-owned commercial banks, which all trade
on the basis of an explicit or implicit government support.” Thus, it is
difficult to know the true debt situation in China today. This somewhat
parallels the condition of today’s Euro-zone, where major banks
depend on presumed government support, while the supporting
governments depend on the banks.
   Many commentators in the past few years have discussed the bal-
looning investment by the Chinese government and rising debt levels.
For example, gross capital formation in China was 49 percent of GDP
in 2013, more than double the world average (World Bank 2014). But
the quality of debt is at least as important as the quantity. According to
Das (2014):

   Chinese data measures two different types of investment—gross fixed
   capital formation measures investment in new physical assets which
   contribute to GDP and fixed-asset investment measures spending on
   already existing assets including land. In 2008, gross fixed capital forma-
   tion and fixed interest investment were roughly equal. Today, gross fixed
   capital formation has fallen to about 70% of fixed-asset investment, con-
   sistent with increasing turnover of already existing assets at frequently
   rising prices. Investment in new assets is heavily focused on frequently
   large scale infrastructure and property. The major concern is that many
   of the projects will not generate sufficient income to service or repay the
   borrowing used to finance the investment. (Italics added.)

  Since land is the primary existing fixed asset in which investment occurs
without adding value, this evidence confirms that the Chinese economy is
now being weakened by excessive investment in a land boom.
                        Real-Assets Model of Crisis                        347

  Riddell (2014) makes the same point, although more obliquely. He
notes that China’s nominal growth rate has slowed from an average of
10 percent per year to 7.7 percent in 2013. At the same time, the rate of
investment has increased from 48 percent of GDP to 54 percent. Logi-
cally, he suggests, this is a sign of danger. If investment is increasing
and being used productively, GDP should be rising in step with the
new capital. However, if the growth rate of GDP falls as investment
increases, that indicates investments are either sterile or not adding as
much value as before. Riddell (2014) continues:

   It should be a concern if a country experiences a surge in its investment
   rate over a number of years, but has little or no accompanying improve-
   ment in its GDP growth rate. . .. This suggests that the investment surge
   is not productive, and if accompanied by a credit bubble (as is often the
   case), then the banking sector is at risk (e.g. Ireland and Croatia followed
   this pattern pre 2008, Indonesia pre 1997). . . . The most likely explana-
   tion for China’s surging investment being coupled with a weaker growth
   rate is that China is experiencing a major decline in capital efficiency.

   What might cause a “credit bubble” or a “decline in capital efficiency”?
In the absence of any reference to real estate or other real assets, presum-
ably Riddell, like most other analysts, would assign responsibility to the
banking system.
   A more plausible explanation, and one that fits the real-assets model
presented in this article, is that the bubble and decline in capital effi-
ciency are the result of speculative investment in land, particularly mar-
ginal land, and in complementary fixed capital, which will lose much or
all of its value after a crash. Before the economy becomes frozen, these
investments are counted as contributions to growth, but eventually they
will turn out to be sterile because they actually drain value from the
economy rather than adding to it. At that point, the previous growth will
be revealed as a mirage. The problem is thus not the total quantity of
debt per se, which is positive as long as it is productive and self-
liquidating. The threat posed by debt to the national economy arises
only when it fails to turn over with enough frequency and engage with
labor in producing needed goods and services. The total quantity of debt
is relevant only because high levels and high growth rates of debt gener-
ally indicate investment in marginal land and capital projects.
348      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

   Despite all of the signs that the days of China’s miraculous growth
are coming to an end, opinion remains divided about whether it is fac-
ing a crisis similar to the one experienced by the United States and
Europe in 2008. Leeb (2013), still bullish on China in July 2013, wrote:
“Whatever overbuilding China may have done, it was simply insuffi-
cient to create an economic crisis. The IMF authored the most compre-
hensive report to date on Chinese overinvestment. China’s debts,
unlike those of the U.S. and most other countries, the IMF notes, are
owed to China itself. Therefore, the risks of a full-blown Chinese eco-
nomic crisis remain small. . .. [F]ears of a Chinese real estate bubble in
particular are way overblown.”
   Nevertheless, the “overblown” bubble seems to be starting to burst.
CNTV (2014) reports a 7.6 percent decline (annualized basis) in house
prices from January to July 2014 in 70 Chinese cities. Anderlini (2014),
writing in the Financial Times, announced that the March 2014 default
of Zhejiang Xingrun Real Estate Company, a Chinese developer,
prompted an emergency discussion with China Construction Bank, its
largest lender, and the central bank of China about a potential bailout.
Zhiwei Zhang, an economist at Nomura Securities, added that most
financial analysts had not yet taken account of the growing risk of such
defaults because they were misled by rising land prices in big cities,
even as property values had dropped by as much as one-third in some
provincial areas, which accounted for two-thirds of the housing under
construction in 2013.
   The Chinese government sought in January 2014 to slow the boom in
property prices by limiting credit (Kerkhoff 2014). By September, it had
reversed course and was trying to prop up the sagging housing market
with incentives for first-time home buyers (Qing and Shao 2014). But
the government is learning the limits of its power to control markets
with short-term financial instruments. Even though the government
owns all of the banks in China, it will not be able to stem the tide of
defaults in a falling land market because it can do nothing to transform
fixed capital, tied up in real estate, into productive circulating capital.
   The real-assets model thus predicts that China will face a significant
decline in growth rates over the next three to five years, possibly drop-
ping into the realm of negative growth. Unemployment will rise, and
conventional stimulus techniques will fail to revive the economy. Land
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                      349

and other asset prices will fall, and if the Chinese banks mark them to
market, they will face liquidity problems in the short run. If they fail to
revalue assets and keep them on their books according to their historic
highs, as Western banks have generally done, it will take even longer to
recover because banks will only be able to resume normal lending
when land prices rise enough to reach the levels of 2013.

                            Policy Responses

We have now seen evidence from a number of countries that a real
assets theory can account for a number of past and present economic
crises that have otherwise been attributed solely to financial misman-
agement. By integrating real variables into the model (investments in
land and fixed capital compared to circulating capital, and the geo-
graphic location of investment), policymakers have more options to
use in formulating instruments to prevent asset bubbles and financial
crises.

                            Post-Crash Response

The current orthodoxy about economic crises is that each one is pecu-
liar and that it is therefore impossible to model them or create policies
to prevent them. Each is caused by a sudden change brought about by
external forces, an “exogenous shock,” such as a sudden increase in oil
prices, the default of a major bank, or the rapid withdrawal of capital
from a nation’s banking system. In such a world of random cataclysm,
all one can do is to make an effort to stabilize the economy after a
shock with fiscal and monetary policies. The debate is then mostly lim-
ited to a conflict between the call for austerity and the call for stimulus.
   Even within the framework of this orthodox account of randomly
generated crises, there is one policy that could be implemented. After a
crash has occurred, one simple response that would restore an econ-
omy to normalcy in short order would be to require all banks to value
their assets at current market value. Banks that lent wisely instead of
joining the mob mentality at the height of the boom would have noth-
ing to fear. By contrast, banks that supplied land speculators with credit
would face bankruptcy, and equity holders would lose their investment
in the bank. This policy need not weaken the banking system as long
350       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

as the central bank provided enough equity on an emergency basis to
keep the bank operating until private investors could be sure the toxic
assets had been removed and were again willing to buy the govern-
ment’s shares. This policy of requiring honesty in accounting could
have the effect of deterring banks in the future from financing asset val-
ues not merited by normal lending practices. However, since many of
the largest banks are now “too big to fail,” meaning too big to be held
accountable, it is not clear whether this remedy could actually be
applied.

                  Crash Prevention: Using the Real-Assets Model

The real assets model proposes two possible methods of preventing
panics before they ever have a chance to get started. The first method
involves credit controls. The second method involves real-asset price
limits.

Credit controls
The original impetus behind periodic booms and busts in modern
economies is the desire to gain a profit by investing in an activity that
generates economic rent—money for nothing. As a collective frenzy
builds, banks become involved and accommodate the boom with lend-
ing against properties with inflated value. As a result, it seems to many
analysts that the best way to prevent or control the boom is to limit
credit.
   On its face, increasing interest rates, capital requirements, down pay-
ment requirements, or any number of other rules ought to be capable
of regulating aggregate financial transactions and preventing specula-
tive booms from occurring. In practice, however, most such efforts ulti-
mately fail. When land prices start rising, lenders in booming cities or
regions become more resourceful in finding ways to circumvent regula-
tions, sometimes legally, sometimes not. This does not mean that finan-
cial regulations can be ignored. It means that other instruments must
also be pursued.
   One conclusion that has been derived from the series of economic
crises in developing nations is that they should protect themselves from
boom and panics by instituting capital controls—rules that limit the
amount of money that can be invested from outside the country.
                        Real-Assets Model of Crisis                      351

Logically, this makes a great deal of sense. Palma’s (2000) analysis of
crises in Chile, Mexico, and Malaysia in the late 1990s indicates that
their economies were destabilized by a rapid influx of capital, followed
by a sudden decline a few years later. In a relatively small economy,
only a small amount of mobile capital can cause instability. The model
Palma uses, however, presupposes that the boom in asset prices in
those countries was caused by the influx of capital.
   Kim and Yang (2008) investigated the validity of that assumption and
discovered that although capital inflows in emerging Asian economies
contribute to booms in asset prices, they only explain a small part of
asset price fluctuations. Kim and Yang (2008: 18) conclude: “Capital
inflows indeed contributed to asset price appreciation in the region,
although capital inflow shocks explain a relatively small part of asset
price fluctuations. Positive capital flow shocks increase stock prices
immediately and land prices with some delay.” One might assume,
nevertheless, that capital controls can help regulate boom-bust cycles
in small, open economies. Olaberrıa (2012:18) finds just the opposite:
“A perhaps surprising result is that higher capital controls (less financial
openness) do not appear to reduce the probability of large capital
inflows being associated with booms in real asset prices.”
   Consider also the anomaly that exchange controls in central Europe,
early in the 1930s, were focused on blocking capital exports, not
imports (Ellis 1941).
   Again, the conclusion from recent evidence seems to be that regula-
tory controls can only be partially successful in preventing the sorts of
asset price fluctuations (booms and busts) that destabilize market
economies. If the instability of developing economies comes primarily
from factors internal to those economies, attention should be focused
on getting the fundamentals right.
   Since the major economic disruptions of Mexico and Malaysia are sur-
prisingly similar to the periodic crises that have affected Japan, the United
States, China, and Spain, it would seem that “the fundamentals” are uni-
versal, not limited to economies that require financial “deepening.”

Taxing land values to limit asset prices
Although adopting financial regulations that limit the credit that banks
can issue during a boom may help prevent future economic crises, it is
352       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

not a sufficient solution. The problem lies mainly in implementing the
restrictive rules adopted after a previous crash and enforcing them
when rising incomes precipitate the next round of growing asset values.
Bank regulators who try to enforce such rules during a boom are trying
to fight psychological forces that deem the rise of asset values as
“progress.”
   A second approach is also needed to contain the problem at an early
stage, before asset prices rise fast enough to create the collective frenzy
that becomes difficult to control. The required instrument would reduce
the incentive of borrowers to invest in fixed assets. A substantial tax on
the value of those assets, particularly on land values, would lower the
price at which those assets trade and simultaneously raise holding costs.
At present, a borrower who can borrow $1 million with a $100,000
down payment must pay carrying costs (interest) on $900,000, a fixed
amount for the life of the loan. By contrast, if the price of land is subject
to a heavy tax, the carrying costs are divided between interest and tax
payments. If tax assessments are updated frequently in a rising market,
the part of the holding cost associated with the tax will rise with the
price and send a signal to buyers discouraging them from purchasing
land for speculative purposes. With that simple device, it should be
possible to prevent the growth of asset values (particularly land values)
beyond their productive capacity. What gives rise to a boom is the idea
that a purchase can be quickly sold to another person who also expects
the rapid escalation of prices. A tax, backed by frequent reassessments,
automatically tempers and dampens that process. When fee-appraisers
base their valuations on “comparable sales,” overpricing of each parcel
generates a cumulative reflective process wherein overpricing may
reflect or reverberate back and forth (Gaffney 1986). When a tax-
assessor follows an upswing in comparable sales it has the opposite
effect. I am not aware that this important tempering function of land
value taxes as been recognized either in the literature or in the con-
sciousness and practice of market actors.
   The effectiveness of the use of property taxation as a method of limit-
ing speculation has implicitly been demonstrated to some extent in the
United States. A number of states have adopted legislation that limits
the rate of increase in the assessed value on residences. California
began the process in 1978 by limiting additions to assessed value for
                       Real-Assets Model of Crisis                     353

property tax purposes to no more than 2 percent per year. Similar laws
were subsequently adopted in Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida,
Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Maryland, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New
York, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, Texas, and Washington
(Mikhailov and Kolman 2002). In the subsequent economic crisis, the
eight states that led the nation in foreclosures (Nevada, California,
Arizona, Florida, Oregon, Illinois, Georgia, and Michigan) all had
assessment limitations. Legislation that was intended to protect home-
owners had the unintended effect of permitting higher land prices and
greater land speculation because assessments could not keep up with
rising prices and thus temper the “irrational exuberance.”
   In nations where provinces or states control the assessment and tax-
ation of land, the disruptive character of land speculation is beyond
the reach of the central government. In China, that is not the case. In
principle, at least, the central government can implement a land value
tax or property tax that would limit investment in land for speculative
purposes. Thus, it is significant that the leadership of China, alone
among nations, has explicitly stated the intention of adopting a
property tax as a method of controlling speculation in housing prices.
Xinhua News Service (2006) reported that a prominent economist, Lin
Yifu, director of the China Economy Research Center of the Beijing
University, favored a property tax “to rein in speculative investment
and ward off a possible financial crisis.” Four years later, “a report sub-
mitted to Deputy Premier Li Keqiang said surging prices for housing
price posed a threat to social stability” (Tao 2010). Presumably, the
news was not that a report was written, but that Deputy Premier Li
had accepted it. Li Keqiang, a trained economist, became Premier of
China in March 2013 (the number two position in the government).
That same month, the government announced a plan “to introduce a
unified national property registration system by the end of 2014,
which could eventually make it possible to impose an annual property
tax on households—yet another way the authorities expect to fight
housing speculation and fend off bubbles” (Barboza 2013). In the sec-
ond half of 2014, as the crisis began to unfold, and house prices began
to fall in most of China, top officials remained quiet (Lelyveld 2014). It
seems likely that top government officials are aware that China’s
banks will soon face a liquidity problem, but a property tax and other
354      The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

preventive measures that might have prevented a rise in housing
prices can no longer avoid a crisis.


                               Conclusion

One of the most basic principles of economic theory is that it deals with
real costs: the time, energy, and materials we give up in one pursuit to
follow another. In that sense, money is not real. It is just a symbol.
There is no real cost when we spend money. In the same way, money,
by itself, does not represent the creation of value. It merely serves as a
claim on value that is created by real economic activity.
   A great deal of economic analysis in recent decades has created con-
fusion on this basic point. It treats money as an object of analysis as if
the manipulation of symbols is the same as the management of real
relationships. For example, the standard Keynesian identity that equates
GDP with consumption plus investment plus government spending
plus net exports creates the illusion that we can remain indifferent
about the qualitative features of each variable. Macroeconomics, in this
view, is simply a matter of balance sheets and has nothing to do with
the real productivity of private or public investments. In this world of
magical thinking, a dollar spent on education is the same whether stu-
dents gain any proficiency or not.
   The two most important features of a real-assets model are 1) that the
real economy matters, and 2) that the health of an economy depends
on the quality, as well as the quantity, of investments. Those who claim
that banks can expand their balance sheets arbitrarily and without add-
ing deposits are correct. But in doing so, banks destabilize the financial
system by increasing their leverage—lowering the ratio of equity to
assets. If they are simultaneously reducing their liquidity by investing
heavily in fixed capital (long-repayment projects) rather than circulating
capital (short-repayment projects), they are pushing the entire economy
into a hazardous position.
   The real-assets model explains why economic crises have been a
recurrent feature of capitalist economies for the past two centuries and
more. The French historian Pierre E    mile Levasseur (1893) traced cycles
back to 1200 A.D. The problem is not inherent in the private ownership
of capital, the characteristic feature of capitalism. The systemic flaw lies
                        Real-Assets Model of Crisis                        355

in the failure to ensure that investment is balanced between circulating
capital and fixed capital. The greatest crises arise when land is not taxed
adequately to prevent the speculative growth of its value. Land specula-
tion then leads periodically to overinvestment in complementary fixed
capital, often in peripheral areas of low inherent value. Credit becomes
tied up in long-term investments, many of which eventually default.
The resulting foreclosures leave banks with overvalued assets that they
refuse to mark to market, leaving banks unable to generate new credit
during the lengthy recovery.
   For a number of years, it seemed that the Chinese miracle of rapid eco-
nomic growth based on massive public investment would somehow
steer clear of the economic distress caused by land speculation and mar-
ginal investment in capital projects. Because of the backlog of latent
demand in that economy for better housing, it was possible to construct
thousands of projects in mid-size cities without exhausting the ability of
China to make efficient use of those investments. By 2014, however, it
became clear that China’s economy had reached a limit of productive
investment in housing and other fixed investment and would be subject
to the same constraints as other economies. There were voices in China
that began warning of this fate as early as 2006, but they were ignored. It
now seems likely that China will face several years of sluggish growth as
land prices fall, defaults rise on marginal projects, and the loss of liquidity
of the state-owned banks forces the central government to cut back on
its investments. At the same time, as house prices fall in the major cities,
the urban middle class will respond to its reduced nominal wealth by
cutting back on consumption. The combination of these effects will
reduce growth further and increase the rate of unemployment.
   The one ray of hope in this otherwise gloomy picture is that some of
the top leadership of China is at least aware that rising land prices need
to be controlled by means of taxation. This is the first sign that any
national government has recognized the use of land value taxation as
an instrument of macroeconomic policy. Although that recognition
came too late to prevent the present crisis in China, it could be used to
prevent future repetitions of the present situation. If China can learn
that lesson in its first experience with a boom-bust cycle in land values,
it will be far ahead of Western governments that have ignored the signs
for centuries.
356       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

                                      Notes

   1. There is no index of land prices in the United States to show this. There
are, however, many studies of particular times and places and industries that
show the point clearly enough to be sure of it. We discuss one of them below:
Homer Hoyt’s classic 100 Years of Land Values in Chicago, 1833–1933. Many
others are in the bibliography.
   2. All construction figures from 2002 to 2012 come from U.S. Census
Bureau (2014a). The 2000 estimate of housing construction comes from U.S.
Census Bureau (2012). All monthly figures represent seasonally adjusted
annual rate.
   3. If capital is $5 million, the annual payments at 8 percent will be $419,300.
Total payments will be $16.77 million (40 x $419,300). Of that amount, $5 mil-
lion repays the principal, and $11.77 million is interest, which is 70 percent of
the total payment.

                                   References

Anderlini, Jamil. (2014). “China’s Central Bank Holds Bailout Talks with
     Property Developer.” Financial Times. March 18. http://www.ft.com/
     cms/s/0/e5590566-ae6c-11e3-aaa6-00144feab7de.html#axzz3KI8iq9PX
Bank of Greece. (2014). “New Index of Apartment Prices by Geographical
     Area.” Bulletin of Conjunctural Indicators (Tables II.7.1 and II.7.2). http://
     www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/NEW_INDEX_OF_APARTMENT_
     PRICES_BY_GEOGRAPHICAL_AREA.PDF
Barboza, David. (2013). “2 Chinese Cities Move to Cool Overheated Housing
     Market.” New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/01/world/
     asia/2-china-cities-move-to-cool-overheated-housing-market.html?_r50
Castle, Stephen. (2013). “Irish Legacy of Leniency on Mortgages Nears an
     End.” New York Times. March 29. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/30/
     business/global/irish-legacy-of-leniency-on-mortgages-nears-an-end.html?
     pagewanted51&_r50&adxnnl51&adxnnlx51416733219-jtwy5oMO4R2K
     MnyWPPkTcQ
China Economic Review. (2014). “Too Many Central Business Districts, Not
     Enough Business.” China Economic Review. http://www.chinaeconomi-
     creview.com/frank-chen-cbre-china-commercial-real-estate-developers
CNTV. (2014). China: Property Sector Continues to Decline in July. CNTV,
     August 18. http://www.globalintelligence.com/insights/geographies/
     asia-news-update/construction-property-development#ixzz3K4JQcbAX
Colliers International. 2010. The Knowledge Report. July. Greater China:
     Office and Residential. http://www.colliersinternational.com/Content/
     Repositories/Base/Markets/China/English/Market_Report/PDFs/Greater
     China-Q2-2010.pdf
                         Real-Assets Model of Crisis                         357

Das, Satyajit. (2014). “China’s Debt Vulnerability.” Economonitor, April 9.
      http://www.economonitor.com/blog/2014/04/chinas-debt-vulnerability/
Davis, Bob and Esther Fung. (2014). “Housing Trouble Grows in China:
      Overbuilding by Real-Estate Developers Leaves Smaller Cities with Glut
      of Apartments.” Wall Street Journal, April 14. http://online.wsj.com/
      articles/SB10001424052702303456104579487790125203828
Davis, Bob and Dinny McMahon. (2013). “Xi Faces Test Over China’s Local
      Debt: Risks from Debt are Still Controllable, Audit Office Says.” Wall
      Street Journal, December 30. http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001
      424052702304591604579289771905130900
Davis, Morris A., Andreas Lehnert, and Robert F. Martin. (2008). “The Rent-
      Price Ratio for the Aggregate Stock of Owner-Occupied Housing.”
      Review of Income and Wealth, 54(2): 279–284. http://www.
      lincolninst.edu/subcenters/land-values/rent-price-ratio.asp
Economic and Social Research Institute (of Ireland). (2011). permanent tsb/
      ESRI House Price Index 1996—2011. http://www.esri.ie/irish_econ-
      omy/historic-reports/permanent_tsbesri_house_p/?
Ellis, Howard S. (1941). Exchange Control in Central Europe. Cambridge:
      Harvard University Press.
Eurostat. (2014a). House Price Index (2010 5 100)—Quarterly Data.
      [prc_hpi_q] http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/product_
      details/dataset?p_product_code5PRC_HPI_Q. (Reach page by searching on
      Google for Eurostat and [prc_hpi_q])
——. (2014b). Construction of Buildings Statistics—NACE Rev. 2. [sbs_na_
      con_r2]. Table 4a on the webpage. On new webpage, under NACE_R2, click
      on “construction of buildings.” http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_
      explained/index.php/Construction_of_buildings_statistics_-_NACE_Rev._2
——. (2014c). Production in Construction—Annual Data, Percentage
      change. [sts_coprgr_a] http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/
      portal/product_details/dataset?p_product_code5STS_COPRGR_A
FlorCruz, Michelle. (2014). “Developers in China Combat Real Estate Over-
      supply with Wacky Deals and Deep Discounts.” International Business
      Times, April 19. http://www.ibtimes.com/developers-china-combat-real-
      estate-oversupply-wacky-deals-deep-discounts-1573307
Gaffney, Mason. (1986). “Why Research Ownership and Values.” In Property
      Tax Assessment: Processes, Records, and Land Values. Eds. Richard R.
      Almy and T. Alexander Majchrowicz, pp. 91–109. Chicago: Economic
      Research Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Interna-
      tional Association of Assessing Officers, in cooperation with the Farm
      Foundation.
——. (2009). After the Crash: Designing a Depression-Free Economy. Mal-
      den, MA: Wiley. Originally published in American Journal of Economics
      and Sociology 68(4):839–1038.
358       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

George, Henry. ([1879] 1979). Progress and Poverty. New York: Robert Schal-
    kenbach Foundation. http://schalkenbach.org/library/henry-george/
    p1p/ppcont.html
Gyourko, Joseph, Yongheng Deng, and Jing Wu. (2010). “Just How Risky
    Are China’s Housing Markets?” VOX, CEPR’s Policy Portal. http://www.
    voxeu.org/article/just-how-risky-are-china-s-housing-markets
Harris, Diane. (2013). “Urban Land Prices Hit New Lows.” Kyero. http://
    news.kyero.com/2013/06/urban-land-prices-hit-new-lows/7234
Harrison, Fred. (1983). Power in the Land: Unemployment, the Profits Crisis,
    and the Land Speculator. New York: Universe Books.
Hoyt, Homer. (1933). One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago: The
    Relationship of the Growth of Chicago to the Rise in Land Values, 1830–
    1933. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kerkhoff, Matthew. (2014). “Red Flags in China—Can it Prevent a Major
    Financial Crisis?” Financial Sense, January 13. http://www.financial-
    sense.com/contributors/matthew-kerkhoff/red-flags-in-china-can-it-
    prevent-major-financial-crisis
Kim, Soyoung and Doo Yong Yang. (2008). The Impact of Capital Inflows on
    Asset Prices in Emerging East Asian Economies: Is Too Much Money Chas-
    ing Too Little Good? Manila: Asian Development Bank. http://aric.adb.org/
    pdf/workingpaper/WP15_Impact_of_Capital_Inflows.pdf
Koo, Richard. (2012). Learning Wrong Lessons from the Crisis in Greece.
    http://ineteconomics.org/sites/inet.civicactions.net/files/BWpaper_KOO_
    052411.pdf
Leeb, Stephen. (2013). “China May Have Ghost Cities But Rapid Growth Is
    No Apparition.” Forbes. http://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/
    2013/07/16/china-may-have-ghost-cities-but-rapid-growth-is-no-apparition/.
Lelyveld, Michael. (2014). “Sliding Prices Raise Doubts Over China’s Prop-
    erty Policies.” Radio Free Asia. http://www.rfa.org/english/commenta-
    ries/energy_watch/property-09082014103859.html
Levasseur, Pierre E                                                
                    mile. (1893). Les Prix. Aperçu de l’Histoire Economique de
    la Valeur et du Revenue de la Terre en France. 13th-18th cents. Extrait
    des M emoires de la Soci     e Nationale d’Agriculture de France. Tome
                                 et
    135. Paris: Typographie Chamerot et Renouard.
Malzubris, Janis. (2008). “Ireland’s Housing Market: Bubble Trouble.” ECFIN
    COUNTRY FOCUS 5(9): 1–7. Brussels: European Commission
    Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs. http://ec.
    europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/publication13187_en.pdf
Marshall, Alfred. ([1890] 1920). Principles of Economics, 8th edition, Vol. 1.
    London: Macmillan. http://www.econlib.org/library/Marshall/marP.html
Mikhailov, Nikolai and Jason Kolman. 2002. Types of Property Tax and
    Assessment Limitations and Tax Relief Programs, Cambridge, MA:
    Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. http://www.lincolninst.edu/subcenters/
                        Real-Assets Model of Crisis                        359

     property-valuation-and-taxation-library/dl/mikhailov.pdf. Accessed May 12,
     2009.
Montagu-Pollock, Matthew. (2009). “House Price Time Series.” Global Prop-
     erty Guide. Makati City, Philippines. http://www.globalpropertyguide.
     com/real-estate-house-prices
Nie, Jun and Guangye Cao. (2014). “China’s Slowing Housing Market and GDP
     Growth.” Macro Bulletin. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank. https://www.
     kansascityfed.org/publicat/research/macrobulletins/mb14Nie-Cao0825.pdf
Olaberrıa, Eduardo (2012). Capital Inflows and Booms in Assets Prices:
     Evidence from a Panel of Countries. Santiago: Bank of Chile. http://
     www.bcentral.cl/estudios/documentos-trabajo/pdf/dtbc675.pdf
Palma, Gabriel. (2000). The Three Routes to Financial Crises: The Need for
     Capital Controls. CEPA Working Paper Series III, Working Paper No. 18.
     New York: New School for Social Research. www.newschool.edu/cepa/
     publications/workingpapers/archive/cepa0318.pdf
Phillips, Matt. (2013). “Welcome to Ireland, Where Mortgage Payments Are
     Apparently Optional.” Quartz, April 2. http://qz.com/50615/welcome-
     to-ireland-where-house-payments-are-optional-apparently/
Qing, Koh Gui and Xiaoyi Shao. (2014). “China Takes Boldest Step Yet to Lift
     Housing Market, Economy.” Reuters, September 30. http://www.reuters.com/
     article/2014/09/30/us-china-economy-property-idUSKCN0HP0PW20140930
Reinhart, Carmen M. (2010). “Eight Hundred Years of Financial Folly.” VOX,
     CEPR’s Policy Portal. http://www.voxeu.org/article/eight-hundred-
     years-financial-folly
Reuters. (2010 and 2014). Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. http://www.reuters.com/
     finance/stocks/financialHighlights?symbol5GS.N. Accessed on May 31,
     2010 and November 10, 2014.
Riddell, Mike. (2014). “China’s Investment/GDP Ratio Soars to a Totally
     Unsustainable 54.4%. Be Afraid.” Bond Vigilantes. https://www.bondvi-
     gilantes.com/blog/2014/01/24/chinas-investmentgdp-ratio-soars-to-a-totally-
     unsustainable-54-4-be-afraid/
Sampaniotis, Theodosios. (2011). The Greek Economy and its Real Estate
     Market as the Crisis Unfolds. www.bankofgreece.gr/BoGDocuments/
     RealEstate_Conference_Dec11_Sampaniotis.pdf
Simpson, Herbert D. and John E. Burton. (1931). The Valuation of Vacant
     Land in Suburban Areas: Chicago Area. Chicago: Northwestern
     University.
Standard and Poor’s. (2014). S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index. http://us.
     spindices.com/indices/real-estate/sp-case-shiller-20-city-composite-home-
     price-index
Stucklin, Mark. (2012). “Planning Approvals Show No Signs of recovery,” Spanish
     Property Insight, May 11. http://www.spanishpropertyinsight.com/2012/05/
     11/planning-approvals-show-no-sign-of-recovery/
360       The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Tao, Fu, Li Shen, Yu Ning, Zhang Yanling, and Huo Kan. (2010). “New Rules
     Pour Cold Water on Housing Market.” Caixin online. April 20. http://
     english.caing.com/2010-04-20/100137084.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (1975a). “Series N30–60: Value of New Private and Pub-
     lic Construction Put in Place, 1957–59 Dollars: 1915–1970.” Historical
     Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, Part 2. http://
     www2.census.gov/prod2/statcomp/documents/CT1970p2-02.pdf
——. (1975b). “Series N70–77: Expenditures for New Construction Private
     Residential and Nonresidential and Public in Current and Constant
     (1929) Dollars 1869–1955.” Historical Statistics of the United States:
     Colonial Times to 1970, Part 2. http://www2.census.gov/prod2/stat-
     comp/documents/CT1970p2-02.pdf
——. (2012). Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2012, Table 964. http://
     www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s0964.pdf
——. (2014). Construction Spending. http://www.census.gov/construction/
     c30/prpdf.html
Vallis, E.A. (1972). “Urban Land and Building Prices 1892–1969.” Estates
     Gazette, May 20.
World Bank. (2014). Gross Capital Formation (% of GDP). Data. http://data.
     worldbank.org/indicator/NE.GDI.TOTL.ZS
Xinhua News Service. (2006). “Economist Proposes Taxes to Ward Off Real
     Estate Crisis.” China Daily, August 1. http://en.people.cn/200608/01/
     eng20060801_288668.html
