9 Mason Gaffney

Two Centuries of Economic Thought
on Taxation of Land Rents!

Professor Harry G. Brown often complained of a “conspiracy of
silence” against the land tax idea. Certainly it has received more silence
than its due, yet it would be hard to find a topic on which so many
economists have rendered opinions and taken positions over the last two
hundred years. I group these writers under five headings, according to
their apparent sympathies towards the policy: (1) mainly negative; (2)
mixed, or shifting and changeable; (3) noncommittal, detached, or
supercilious; (4) positive but tentative, limited, partial, and remote; (5)
mainly positive.

Many, indeed most, of those contributing to the debate had to be omit-
ted to save space. On the affirmative side, some of these omitted are
Henry George, Harry G. Brown, Thomas N. Carver, Eli Heckscher,
Frank Graham, Lawson Purdy, Frederic Howe, Philip Cornick, Paul
Alyea, Pierre Proudhon, Alfred R. Wallace, Joseph Schumpeter, Ed-
ward Polak, Philip Raup, Eli Schwartz, Arthur Becker, Raymond
Richman, Marion Clawson, John Ise, F. F. von Wieser, Silvio Gesell,
Charles Trevelyan, Walter Pollock, Thomas Paine, Thomas Jefferson,

1. Research support from the Robert Schalkenbach Foundation is gratefully acknow-
ledged. Bibliographical help came from Paul Downing, Dennis Jesmok, Earl Bossard, and
especially Peter Wells. 1 drew on the bibliography of Donald Ellickson, “A History of Land
Taxation Theory,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Wisconsin, 1966. A dissertation just com=
pleted by Terence Dwyer at Harvard has been very useful both bibliographically and con-
ceptually.

151
152 LAND AS A TAX BASE

and the Count Destutt Tracy, Louis Post, J. C. Stamp, and Josiah
Wedgwood. On the negative side, some notable omissions are Frederic
Bastiat, Gustav Cassel, Robert Harvey, Alexander Hamilton, John Hob-
son, Manuel Gottlieb, Yetta Scheftel, F. H. Finnis, Elmer Fagan, Carl C.
Plehn, Dean Worcester, Ezra Mishan, Walter Morton, Raleigh Barlow,
Albert Schaaf, Murray Rothbard, and George Hoxie. In the uncertain
middle I have neglected Henry Aaron, John and Ursula Hicks, Arthur
Weimer and Homer Hoyt, Donald Hagman, Arch Woodruff, Laszlo
Ecker-Racz, Irving Fisher, Ernest Fisher, P. H. Clarke, Charles McLure,
Abba Lerner, Benjamin Franklin, Kenneth Boulding, Charles Gide,
Frank Taussig, Arthur Laffer, James Heilbrun, Carl Bye, Albert
Hirschman, H. G. Hayes, and Erik Lindahl. No doubt I have also
neglected to acknowledge all those neglected. But I have tried to cover
the major issues.

Mainly Negative

Large numbers of economists have, over the years, articulated their
opposition to the heavy and exclusive use of land as a tax base, par-
ticularly in the thoroughgoing manner advocated by Henry George.
Some have attacked the land tax directly; others have worked on the con-
ceptual structure of the argument. They are grouped here according to
their most emphasized or most distinctive lines of argument.

Fusing Land with Capital: Theory

J. B. Clark in The Distribution of Wealth (1899) led the assault on
George by undercutting the distributive basis of classical economics, the
threefold division of inputs into land, labor, and capital. Clark’s work
marks the watershed between classical political economy and neoclassical
economics. George himself believed that this quantum change was
designed to undo his influence. While this might seem paranoid today, we
must remember that George was the best-selling popular economist of
the time, indeed of all time—Laffer, Thurow, Galbraith, Friedman,
Heilbroner combined — and it was no more unusual for an establishmen-
tarian at that time to be anti-Georgianthan for one to refute Marx today.
It is not hard to imagine that Clark was also gunning for Marx.
However, J. B. Clark states it is George’s marginal theory of wages that
led him to develop his own (1899, pp. viii, xiii). Charles Collier (1979, p.
270) supports George’s claim. He cites Simon Pattern: “Nothing please a
. . . Single taxer better than . . . to use the well-known economic theories
. . . [therefore] economic doctrine must be recast . . . it must isolate itself
more fully from history . . .” (Patten 1908, p. 219). Frank A. Fetter also
GarFney: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 153

believes the “single tax agitation” is what moved Clark to reformulate
theory (Fetter 1927, rpt. 1977 pp. 126-28).

Clark’s obliteration of land as a category takes two forms. One is the
idea that all factors alike have marginal products, so the laws of produc-
tion are symmetrical. Rent is not set apart as a “residual,” due to
“differential” fertility, location, or other qualities. Land is productive
too, so land rent is no longer a “surplus,” but a payment for a productive
input. This payment is a real and legitimate social cost, an opportunity
cost of taking land from the best alternative use.

Actually, none of this much affects the case for taxing land. Residual
imputation of rent is reconciled with marginal imputation via Euler’s
theorem, and the productivity of land does not say anything about who
should receive the income. But Clark’s recasting of theory did serve to
block the mental pathway via which classical political economy pointed
so sharply towards land taxation by calling rent a residual surplus. One
still hears Clarkogenic arguments levelled against land taxation.

Yet more was needed, to preclude permanently any clear distinction of
inputs. Marginal productivity, after all, is the tool of those who want to
impute specific contributions to specific inputs, and this could lead to
peculiar treatment of land. Clark’s other stroke (1883, 1895-96) was to
essay a capital theory that would remove the quality of capital that
distinguishes it from land, namely that capital is produced by labor,
wears out, and is replaced. This is a different Clark from the crystalline
logician of Distribution of Wealth. This is a mystic who creates
ectoplasm in lieu of material capital.

Clark’s ectoplasm is permanent; similar to land, it has no finite life. -
Clark engages the energies of Francis A. Walker (1888) and Bohm-
Bawerk (1895-96), and Clark’s follower Frank Knight (1946) engages
Hayek (1936) in fruitless debates in their strange efforts to deny that
capital turns over. The Austrians have no difficulty understanding the
differences of land and capital; Knight believes the distinction can not be
made, and he attacks it with vigor. George Stigler, Knight’s disciple,
indicates that the Austrian idea of a period of investment is objectionable
because it presumes a distinction between capital and land (1941, p. 278).
Stigler’s only objection to Clark is that Clark made too many concessions
(1941, p. 317). The strongest argument for untaxing buildings while “up-
taxing” land is that it provides an incentive to replace and renew decrepit
and obsolete capital, which, unlike land, is both reproducible and
depreciable. Clark and Knight’s concept of capital as an ether of immor-
tal spirits is calculated to silence such arguments by destroying the very
words in which they might be made.

Philip Wicksteed parallels Clark. All resources are fixed. “There is no
154 LAND AS A TAX BASE

such thing” as a supply curve—supply merely reflects the demand of
those already possessing resources. The laws of distribution are sym-
metrical. Rent is erased. “There is no surplus at all” (1914, p. 15).
Wicksteed deplores the misleading idea of diminishing returns because it
is so intuitive to hold land fixed and let labor vary, resulting in a residual
to land. He prefers to make land the variable: “ . . . in practical problems
. . . any individual can have as much land as he likes if he will pay the
price... . ” (1914, p. 23).

The modern usage of “variable proportions” in preference to
diminishing returns, and indifference curves in preference to either,
reflects Wicksteed and the extended flight from identifying rent as a
surplus attaching to land.

Vilfredo Pareto (1897) is the progenitor of “transfer rent.” The evi-
dent effort is to erase classical land rent and instead replace it with a new
concept of the same name and a meaning analogous enough to lend
plausibility to the switch. Transfer rent is just the surplus above oppor-
tunity cost; any factor may earn some, with land getting no more than
any of the other factors. This destroys the classical contrast that human
effort is a sacrifice of leisure, comfort, and often safety, while land comes
free as a gift from Nature.

Alvin Johnson (1902) developed the idea in America, with emphasis on
undercutting the case for taxing land. Land is mobile economically
among competing uses, and so yields no more transfer rent than other
factors.

Pareto’s idea is subtly blended with Clark-Wicksteed’s factor sym-
metry; it is hard to trace it explicitly for many years until the work of
Frank Knight. More careful users of transfer rent, such as Alfred Mar-
shall, Joan Robinson, and Hubert Henderson, have been scrupulous to
distinguish the social viewpoint from the individual, and social distribu-
tion theory from exchange theory. Robinson writes, “From the point of
view of society, land . . . is provided free, and the whole rent is a surplus
and none of it is a social cost” (1933, p. 107). She uses only opportunity
cost in partial analysis.

Knight, on the other hand, totally fuses the individual and social view-
points. A cost to one is a cost to all. There is no aggregation problem, no
fallacy of composition. Opportunity cost is social cost. There is no basis
for distinguishing land from capital. “Killing off previous claimants” to
land is merely an investment like any other; competition keeps the returns
down to market levels (1924, rpt. 1952, pp. 167-69). It resembles a
caricature of Chicago, but it is Chicago; it has been reprinted as a classic
by the American Economic Association. Knight also argues (1953, p.
810) that slave-owners had just titles to slaves, because of society’s sanc-
tion and open competition for capture of slaves. “Summary liberation”
GAFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 155

was unethical. “Society” was to blame and compensation was due. How-
ever, he does not say what tax should be used to finance the redemption.

“Choice” is everything. “Apart from a necessity of choosing, values
have no meaning or existence.” “. . . The cost of any value is simply the
value that is given up when it is chosen” (1924, rpt. 1952, pp. 167-69).
Knight is quite clear that this undercuts classical ideas about taxing rent.
George Stigler tracks Knight faithfully (1947, chap. 7); Milton Friedman
brings Knight to the masses. In private correspondence Friedman occa-
sionally refers to the land tax as “the least bad tax,” but inconsistently
reverts to Knight’s and Pareto’s concepts which impute rents to
everything and everyone.

Frank A. Fetter is a persistent critic of Ricardian rent. He would erase
all distinction between land and capital, and evidently also between
social and individual viewpoints, and give a broader reading to rent. He
does not, however, arrive at any clear alternative, and ultimately he
mainly appears to have carped and nit-picked at the classics, as well as
repeated J. B. Clark.

Fusing Land With Capital: Applied Economics and Law

Some real estate economists, students of R. T. Ely, have merged land
with capital on practical business grounds. Richard Ratcliff writes that
“Net Income Can’t Be Split” between land and capital (1950). Dorau and
Hinman were saying much the same in 1928: practica! real estate men
cannot “unscramble the omelette” and split income between land and
capital. Yet one can wonder how, if we cannot split net income, we can
know what net income is, or even if any exists, since net income is cash
flow less depreciation, and land is not depreciable. The Internal Revenue
Code is very clear on this point. Frederick Babcock’s Valuation of Real
Estate (1932), generally regarded as definitive, devotes several chapters to
splitting income between land and buildings. His approach is followed by
A. A. Ring, Morris Shenkel, and many others.

Henry C. Carey (1840) is better remembered today as a popular
crusader than a seminal theorist, but he was influential in formulating
protectionist and expansionist thought in Lincoln’s day. Carey had no
use for land taxation, nor for any taxation that might obviate tariffs. He
is enjoying a modern revival at the hands of Lyndon La Rouche (former
U.S. Labor Party candidate for president, now a Democratic primary
candidate). As a proto-Keynesian (but Anglophobic) mercantilist, Carey
regarded classical political economy with deep distrust and sought to
discredit Ricardo by claiming that cultivation actually progressed from
worse to better land. This principle alluded to Westward migration into
the fertile corn belt lands, a part of The American System which he and
Henry Clay promoted. This was supposed to weaken the idea of differen-
156 LAND AS A TAX BASE

tial rent, but it has not received much of a following. His more enduring
point is that western speculators made no more on their dollars than
other investors — hence, no surplus.

Carey’s theme is repeated later in a much-noted study by Shannon and
Bodfish (1929) showing that land speculator returns were no more than,
perhaps less than, returns on other investments during the 1920s. Shan-
non and Bodfish conclude from this that no differential tax is justified.
Here, economic surplus is implicitly redefined from Ricardian rent to the
increments received from buying and selling rents capitalized into land
titles. Pareto’s redefinition of rent makes it only a surplus over oppor-
tunity cost. Carey-Shannon-Bodfish make it a surplus over a normal
return on the historical purchase price. For Ricardo and George, of
course, land rent is the whole surplus above zero, because land is sup-
plied by Nature, and they look at social issues from a social viewpoint.

Willford King (1921, 1924) fuses land and capital when he writes that
capital itself would yield no profit above its costs were it not for the rise
of land values. The speculative increase on land yields the return to
capital. Evidently, he is describing investments in new buildings built on
land already speculatively valued, and entered as a cost—a common
situation today, where investors buy into “negative cash flows,” and hold
on. This is then a modified version of Carey-Shannon-Bodfish. Once one
buys land at a speculative price, rising rents are necessary to yield a nor-
mal rate of return.

Frank Knight, we have seen, joined J. B. Clark in denying or obscur-
ing in metaphysics the most distinctive qualities of capital vis-a-vis land,
to wit its formation, migration, consumption, and replacement. Knight
(1953) goes on to develop the doctrine of vested interest acquired by inno-
cent purchase of land at advanced prices, a doctrine held by Francis
A. Walker, J. S. Mill, and many others. Once society has let this happen
it has endorsed and underwritten the contract, regardless of the origins
of rent, and it would destroy confidence in contracts to act otherwise.
Land becomes the moral equivalent of man-made capital. This
presumably occurs some time after the first owner invests economically in
“killing off previous claimants,” as Knight puts it.

However one regards Knight the moralist, he is a bad lawyer. Few
things are more basic to our Common Law than the underlying owner-
ship by the sovereign of the regal estate —now called “real estate.” This
follows logically from the sovereign’s monopoly of deadly force used to
acquire land. Titles originate with the sovereign, who reserves para-
mount rights to condemn, police, regulate, zone—and tax. Titles are
held subject to taxation, and tax liens are prior to private liens. That is
the legal contract with the title holder. Anything more is based on senti-
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 157

ment and political clout, not contract. Still, the innocent buyer doctrine
has put down many potential socializers of unearned increment.
Granted, they say, that many landholders have grown rich in their sleep,
yet there are others who bought in recently at high prices. It would be un-
fair to injure them, and so we must spare all.

It is ironic, then, to look at the detail of California’s Proposition 13 of
June 6, 1978, which applies exactly the reverse doctrine of innocence.
Proposition 13 spares the ancient holder, he who innocently rode up the
price escalator through no “fault” or desire of his own. High prices are
the fault of recent buyers. The Proposition punishes these recent buyers
by raising their assessments, while freezing others. Nor is this an inadver-
tent result; it was the major discussion point of Howard Jarvis, the
measure’s creator.

Equally ironic is the suppression of latent land values by low-density
zoning. Many “innocent” buyers have lost out, as have their numerous
lawsuits alleging inverse condemnation and demanding compensation.
An equal confiscation of value by taxation would put billions a year into
the fisc, to increase services or reduce other taxes. Yet, increasingly
restrictive zoning blankets the country. The same developers who fight it
where they build support it where they live. Only a few of Frank Knight’s
modern Chicago knights have raised a lance against it —it is easier to
pick on rent controls.

We conclude that the innocent buyer doctrine is only a good debating
point, but not a binding constraint in the real world of our institutions
and cultural baggage. Law and custom say that land is different, and no
buyer is presumed innocent or “lacking in worldly knowledge” about his

_tisks. We never promised him a rose garden, and he probably knows it.
He only plays dumb because it often works.

Fusing Land with Capital: Collectivist Approaches

Karl Marx is a strange bedfellow for Frank Knight. Although
sometimes discoursing lengthily on land rent, he generally merges it with
capital and its “mode of production.” He often sacrifices consistency
and clarity to sarcasm and invective, but the real Karl Marx stands up in
Capital (1867, rpt. 1906, vol I, chap. 33). He attacks Wakefield’s
Australian scheme for locking up the frontier at high prices, in order to
throw workers back into the arms of employers. This was a plan to create
an artificial scarcity of land; its effect should be to increase rents, land
values, and the bargaining position of landholders. But. for Marx, the
scarcity of land only increases the bargaining power of capital. He totally
transfers the gains of land to the accounts of capital, even though “the
old world constantly throws in capital” (1867, rpt. 1906, p. 843). Marxian
158 LAND AS A TAX BASE

distribution theory, like Clark-Wicksteed-Knight, thus fuses land and
capital. But where Clark et al. simply stir them up, Marx subordinates
land to capital. For Marx, capital has the superpowers of
Mephistopheles; it seizes all surpluses, however generated, even though
its supply is elastic.

When we ask what Marx means by “capital,” we find Clark-Knight
again. “. . . The value of commodities . . . in the circulation. . . of
capital, suddenly presents itself as an independent substance . . . in which
money and commodities are mere forms which it assumes and casts off in
turn” (1867, rpt. 1906, p. 172). “Land as capital is no more eternal than
any other capital” (1847, p. 138). It is fascinating to speculate on whether
Clark the Rightist knew he was borrowing from Marx the Leftist. Cer-
tainly they shared a common purpose, that is, to destroy the case for land
taxation as advanced by Clark’s target, George, and Marx’s target, Proud-
hon. One wonders, too, if they read the transcendentalists and Hindu
mystics, for they both, like Knight later, seem to have enlisted the
Hindu’s Brahma for economic analysis. In any case, Marx, like Clark-
Knight, uses these concepts to create a paradigm in which it is impossible
to perceive the rationale for land taxation, a concept which to many neo-
Marxists is simply meaningless.

Another strange bedfellow for Marx is Charles Spahr (1891) who has
his own way of fusing land and capital. Spahr sees land value produced
not by all men but by the good people collectively. Spahr identifies cer-
tain groups whose presence lowers land values, and who, therefore, have
no claim to share in them. He mentions American Indians and “the most
degraded negroes.” Hungarians, Italians, and Bohemians are a wash at
best. Anglo-Saxon laws recognize that land value results from im-
provements, public as well as private. The old owners paid for these indi-
vidually and collectively, so they created the land value.

Spahr would then of course keep all wealth private, both land and
capital; in contrast, Marx would socialize both land and capital. The
common theme is a denial of George’s effort to compromise by
distinguishing land values, publicly created, from capital created by
private effort and sacrifice. Together they sow the seeds of irrepressible
conflict between Communism and Capitalism.

Let us end with the utopian socialists and others who say, “you cannot
unscramble an omelette.” Production is collective, they say, and imputa-
tion is futile (Russell 1945, rpt. 1967, p. 612). Better to drop the effort and
distribute “to each according to his needs.” There is a good deal of this in
the advocacy of income taxation, too, “from each according to ability.”
In the long run this leads to collectivism, of the right or left, limited only
by the emigration of those with high ability and low needs (as perceived
by the authorities).
GaFFNEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 159

Inelastic Supply of Capital

C. B. Fillebrown (1907, 1914, 1916; see also Marling, pp. 40, 44), a
George follower, published a sly argument based on Seligman’s doctrine
of tax capitalization. The doctrine said that land taxes serve to lower selling
prices, so new buyers buy “free of tax,” which all falls on sellers. Very
well, says Fillebrown, let us go on from there. Owners of capital are pay-
ing taxes; owners of land are not, even though they appear to, because
they bought free of taxes. To make landowners pay equal taxes, then, we
may raise the rate each year by a surtax rate equal to the whole tax on
capital. After a few years, voila! We shall have the single tax.

This was too provocative to ignore. T. S. Adams (1916), H. J. Daven-
port (1917), and E. R. A. Seligman (1916) replied that if taxes borne by
capital lower the after-tax return on capital, they divert investors into
land until prices rise, equalizing the return on all investments. The new
owner may buy clear of land taxes, but he is indirectly taxed by taxes on
capital which lower the capitalization rate and raise the price of land. An
old tax is a good tax because the market has adjusted to it; any change
will hurt someone, and Fillebrown is rejected. One wonders what the
world would be like today if all other new proposals, such as the Six-
teenth Amendment, had to meet the same test.

Davenport and Seligman went on to adumbrate a theory that is hard to
distinguish from what is now called the “Harberger thesis.” In a closed
economy, taxes on capital are borne by capital and are substantially
neutral, provided the coverage is total, because capital has no escape
routes. Total capital stock is virtually fixed in the short run because cur-
rent saving is small next to the accumulated treasure of centuries.
Besides, it is not known whether a lower net return after tax will raise or
lower saving.

Where, says Seligman rhetorically to George, is all this capital to come
from to fill the vacant lots? There is no fund of capital floating in the
air —it can only come from other uses (Seligman 1895, rpt. 1923, chap.
III, sect. 3). The metaphor and the idea both actually originate with
Charles Spahr (1891, p. 632). There is the hand of J. B. Clark here, too.
Clark assumed a “static” economy with “fixed” resources. Thus by
assumption capital is fixed, like land. A “static” economy is akin to a
closed economy: capital is fixed.

Jens Jensen, although not given to unequivocal affirmations, joins in
this group: “. . . the property tax on producers’ goods must rest largely on
the owners of capital in general in the form of a lower interest rate . . .”
(1931, pp. 61, 90). This is because the supply of capital is fixed.

It is easy to see the magnetism of this idea for the 1960 Chicago school,
with its emphasis on scarcity, and allocation of fixed supplies. Only the
160 ' LAND AS A TAX BASE

Utopian Keynesians thought you could pull new capital out of the air,
and they saw investment, not saving, as the effective constraint on capital
formation. It was natural for monetarist Chicagoans to differentiate
themselves from Utopian Keynesians who promised suspiciously too
much — higher employment, plus capital formation as a free lunch. Thus
Chicago’s Harberger replicated Seligman-Adams-Spahr-Jensen and sup-
plied a rationale for taxing capital. Capital is as good a base as land, pro-
vided the tax be uniform, the supply fixed, the economy closed, and the
flow of investment adequate. Chicago rejected the assumption of Netzer
and Musgrave that capital taxes are shifted.

Meanwhile, the Keynesians of the ’60s were rediscovering one, if not
all, of the wheels on the carriage of Henry George. As had George, they
pulled new capital “out of the air”; following George’s ideas, they did it
by favorable tax treatment. Unlike him, their vehicle was the income tax;
and unlike him, they made labor pick up most of the revenue losses. Yet,
there is a promise (or a threat) in their tax policies of converting the cor-
porate income tax, and the property part of the personal income tax, into
taxes on land income, with capital virtually exempt. It may not be coin-
cidental that Walter Heller (1954) wrote in favor of taxing land in
developing countries and studied at Madison where, we will see, John R.
Commons advocated accelerated depreciation as a Georgian tool.

Jacob Stockfisch: (1956, 1957), who with Earl Rolph (1954) kept
Adams-Spahr-Seligman alive and anticipated Harberger, points out
explicitly the Georgian implications of income tax loopholes. The effect
of accelerated depreciation, investment tax credits, and expensing capital
outlays is to exempt an increasing share of capital income from the tax
base, leaving nondepreciable land bearing the brunt. While Georgist
frontal assault waves were breaking against the rock of local property
taxes, Keynesian subtlety was transforming the income tax. Stockfisch
seems to view this transformation negatively. However, he identifies a tax
development that Georgists let pass unrecognized as a move toward their
preferred reform.

To be sure, Stockfisch overstates the case. Tax-cutting Keynesians who
gave investment incentives for capital were also leaving many loopholes
for land income. They were also piling up payroll taxes on workers, taxes
George would have execrated. And yet, like George, they had a dream, a
dream that untaxing capital could pull new capital out of the air, and
spin off multiplied increased output and jobs. If the methods were
different, the expansive optimistic spirit was alike, and quite at odds with
the limited resources, competing ends, astringent skepticism, and expen-
sive lunches of Chicago.

And so we find the “conservatives” Spahr, Jensen, Seligman, Adams,
GAFFNEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 161

Davenport, Knight, Rolph, Stockfisch, Harberger et al. rationalizing the
taxation of capital. Meanwhile the “liberal” Georgists and Keynesians
rationalize untaxing it, linking up with various right-wingers who must
find their Chicago allies’ position baffling, and alienating many left-
wingers who view capital only as Robin Hood viewed the fat monk’s
purse. It is a confusing paradox that Chicago and other conservatives
should line up with the Left on an issue so central to economic ideologies
as the taxation of capital. One root of this paradox is the traditional reac-
tion to the single-tax drive to replace capital with land in the tax base. In
this context, taxing capital is the conservative position. Frank Knight is
the pivotal figure. He dominates two generations at Chicago; his
relentless antipathy to George lies between the lines of much of his work
and locks his followers into a paradigm that guides them away from tax-
ing rent.

If uniformity can make the taxation of capital efficient, so can it make
other taxes efficient. We find much of the world accepting general income
taxes for this reason, and now increasingly general sales taxes and next
VAT. Forward shifting and the excess burden of indirect taxation are “ex-
cise tax effects,” not the effects of general taxes. General equilibrium
analysis, and theories of second-best all point toward this policy finding.

Ragnar Frisch (1939) used such a course of thought to attack Harold
Hotelling’s basic article on marginal-cost pricing. The attack was equally
levelled against Hotelling’s corollary case for taxing land to meet the
deficits of marginal-cost pricing with decreasing costs —a case William
Vickrey has adopted and developed. Yet a uniform sales tax applied in-
discriminately both to increasing and decreasing cost producers is in-
herently inefficient, for reasons Hotelling gave: it is more efficient to sub-
sidize the latter. Still, much of the later writing on welfare economics
follows Frisch, undercutting Hotelling’s principles and the implementa-
tion of marginal-cost pricing with theories of second-best and all that
(Little 1950, rpt. 1960, appendix IV).

The other troubles with uniformity as a working guide are that there
are not closed economies and there are no truly uniform taxes. Taxes on
capital drive it away —the local supply is never fixed. In an open
economy only one thing is closed, and that is the land supply. Tax
jurisdictions are defined as areas of land; capital and people move in and
out. So skeptics of the Harberger-Seligman-Spahr approach, such as
Netzer, still have a lot to say about the excess burden of indirect taxation
and the superiority of land as a tax base. As for Gaffney (1971), his reasons
for believing the property tax to be progressive do not include a full
subscription to the Harberger thesis, or any belief that the U.S. economy
is more than partially closed.
162 LAND AS A TAX BASE

The Social Functions of Land Speculation

Richard T. Ely advanced a theory of “ripening costs” to explain the
function of land speculation. By holding land idle until the rise in value,
he says, “I perform social service” (1920, p. 127). The service is to pre-
empt land from premature underimprovement, while it ripens to a higher
use. Holding costs — the unrealized latent rents — are the “costs of ripen-
ing.” Land taxes force premature use at less than optimal intensity.

Ely’s idea had a strong following in the 1920s, followed by a crash in
the 1930s, after which Ely and Wehrwein ruefully accepted the revised
metaphor of Simpson and Burton (1931, p. 44): “We speak of land ripen-
ing, but this is putting land into cold storage, and loading the community
with the frozen assets that result.” The pros and cons of the doctrine are
easily subsumed today in the modern rule of planning the timing of a
series of replacements over time so as to maximize discounted cash flow.

Ely’s idea was briefly revived by Donald Shoup (1970) and Peter
Mieszkowski (1970, p. 17), but not pushed. Roger Smith (1979) and Louis
Rose (1971) have kept it alive, and John Krutilla has applied it to the pre-
emption of scenic resources. But these modern statements are much more
careful and limited than Ely’s sweeping generalization; Krutilla’s avoids
tax issues entirely. It is not necessary to frame the question in the emotive
pugilistic style of the 1920s. It is not a gut question of whether individual
landholders serve any function, but rather how that function is affected
by taxes. Shoup, Rose, and Smith suggest that land taxes motivate
premature conversion. Gaffney (1970, 1973b), on the other hand, em-
phasizes that building taxes delay conversion. Ely’s soul marches on in
the political movement for preferential assessment of ripening land.
Whether Ely originated the idea, or, like some composers, merely picked
up an old folk tune, we may never know. Nevertheless the idea persists. It
thrives in our times because urban sprawl has brought dreams or fears of
ripening to so many more lands than ever before that every country
Muzak box plays Ely’s tune.

Ely also objected to calling land supply “fixed.” A high price induces
more supply, man-made. He interpreted many capital improvements,
land use conversions, migrations, discoveries, and substitutions of
capital for land as actually “increasing the land supply.” Many neo-
classical economists approve of this locution, which helps excuse them
from rationalizing rent as a surplus. Orris Herfindahl (1974), the
neoclassical mineral economist, saw mineral rents as mainly a return of
discovery costs —a position I like to believe he would modify if writing
after OPEC. He reflects the Chicago compulsion to rationalize markets so
perfectly that there is no unearned wealth except by chance, and even
then, it is a functional reward for taking chances (see Gaffney 1979).
GaAFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 163

J. B. Clark (1899, pp. 85-87), H. J. Davenport (1917), and B. H. Hib-
bard (1930) identify another function of land speculation, that of hasten-
ing the conquest of the frontier. “The lure of unearned increment” drew
pioneers westward earlier than otherwise. Land taxation would put a
damper on this “rent-seeking” behavior, which Clark and his followers
regarded as beneficial, and slow down the early development of frontiers
that were otherwise submarginal. Alvin S. Johnson claims the same effect
in cities: unearned increments lead men to build in anticipation of future
demand. Rising land values in boomtowns cause “overbuilding,” a
desirable outcome (1914, p. 35). At the same time, rising land values keep
farmers from leaving for the city (1914, p. 34). B. M. Anderson (1914)
refutes these positions, apologizing at the same time for siding with the
single taxers.

To Ely, the function of land speculation is to delay use. To Clark et al.
speculation serves to advance use. None of these economists sought to
reconcile their polar positions, but instead united in their criticism of
land taxation, which Ely said would bring on new land too soon, and
Clark et al. said would delay it. George himself intended land taxes to act
on the better lands, causing infilling and full use, and obviating pre-
mature recourse to marginal lands. Progress and Poverty is filled with
complaints against urban sprawl and scattered rural settlement.

Davenport (1909) also raises the soil conservation issue. He believes
that land taxes encourage soil mining, looting, and abandonment of
erosive soils (and, by extension, of other extractive resources). This is
also a theme of Seligman.

F. Y. Edgeworth writes that land taxes would inevitably bite into
building profits, that builders’ and buyers’ fears would magnify the deter-
rent to build, and bankers’ fears would doubly magnify the problem. The
tax would hamper raising money on the “security of the premises.”
Edgeworth also objects to “forcing the market,” and anticipates Ely’s
ripening cost doctrine — speculation is reserving land for a higher use. “In
fine, the interest of monopolists is not always contrary to that of their
customers” (1906, p. 73). The mood of Edgeworth’s prose is more queru-
lous than mordant, and he concedes some limited role for taxing un-
earned increments. The limits, however, are clearly his primary interest.

Edgeworth’s point about land as collateral for loans is not found in
other scholarly critics, and he himself gives it only a Parthian shot — and
wisely so. It is clear in theory and experience that untaxing buildings im-
proves the credit of builders as such; taxing land weakens the credit of
holdout land speculators and helps shift land to builders. Yet,
Edgeworth’s point has an active life in political campaigns that touch
164 LAND AS A TAX BASE

anywhere near our subject. Lessees on Crown land in British Columbia,
for example, successfully oppose the Crown’s extraction of market rents
by pleading their credit ratings, used to attract eastern capital “for the
benefit of all.”

Local Land Taxes as a “Tragedy of the Commons”

Alfred Marshall, who sees much merit in land taxation, also sees it as
overcrowding central cities, and proposes that some land tax revenues be
earmarked to a “fresh air fund” to offset this damage. Leonard Darwin
(1907) carries this much further than Marshall. However, Edward Polak
(1915) replies that cities generate more positive than negative spillovers.

A more challenging negative comes from Edwin Cannan. Cannan
defends taxing buildings on the now familiar basis that they increase
local public costs, and\in proportion to building value (1907, p. 39).
Buildings receive more services in large cities than small, so untaxing
them will subsidize congéstion in central cities. Free services to urban
building create something\analogous to a “tragedy of the commons,”
overcrowding cities and destroying rent (1907, p. 44).

Although Cannan’s styh is partisan, and much of his work unim-
pressive, this point is basic;‘he desperately wants an answer in light of to-
day’s exclusionary zoning and related policies. Cannan’s argument needs
adapting today when the suburbs outdo the central cities in their fear of
fiscal parasites. Yet it is fiscal sharing more than physical congestion that
concerns Cannan. His logic leads towards pooling tax revenues of
whatever kind at higher levels of government, as proposed by Colin
Clark. It is perhaps the great weakness of most Georgians that they have
persisted in pushing land taxation purely as a local policy, thus leading
right into Cannan’s powerful rebuttal which currently is sweeping the
field.

Inadequacy of Land as a Tax Base

Spahr (1891) and later Seligman (1895, rpt. 1923) write that marginal
communities have little land value and hence no land value tax base. This
is consistent with their belief that taxes on capital are borne by capital
(for if local capital taxes come instead out of land rents, then a direct tax
on land is simply a more efficient way of tapping the taxable surplus,
which cannot exceed rent anyway [Andelson and Gaffney 1979]). It is at
odds with their belief that farmers bear most of a tax on land values, a
contradiction so glaring that Spahr and Seligman have little message for
today. In retrospect, Edwin Cannan had a stronger point. He did not
question the adequacy of rent, but the efficiency of locational incentives
created by socializing rent through local taxation.
GaFFNEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 165

Many economists have questioned land’s adequacy as a tax base.
Ernest Kurnow is the most recent and quantitative of these (1959, 1960,
and 1961). Gaffney has criticized his procedures elsewhere (1970,
pp. 180-81).

Jens Jensen notes that land taxes are capitalized, but the value of
capital has to remain at its cost of production. He sees capital therefore
as able to yield “enormous revenue” compared to land (1931, p. 91). The
opposite view is that local taxes on whatever base are shifted into land
values. John A. Zangerle (1927) takes this view, tracing it back to John
Locke (1692) and Jacob Vanderlint (1734). The physiocrats also held this
view, as did Adam Smith. Gaffney has elaborated on this theme (1970),
citing Paul Douglas, Bronson Cowan, and Ebenezer Howard, among
others. A curious twist is that the arch-critic Alvin S. Johnson sees land
rent as much more than adequate to cover all public needs (1914, pp.
29, 30).

Wide Distribution of Landownership

Alvin S. Johnson’s major theme is that single tax is “a device for the
spoliation of the middle class” (1914, p. 30), because they own most of
the urban land, and ail the farmland. Charles Spahr (1891) had earlier
sounded the same note. E. R. A. Seligman (1895, rpt. 1923) takes relish in
quoting Voltaire’s satire L’Homme au quarante écus, accusing the
physiocratic land taxers of a regressive proposal, hitting the poor people
who own all the land. It is fascinating to read these pre-econometric
economists who issue facts on their own authority without data.

General Francis A. Walker (1883a, rpt. 1898), director of the U.S. cen-
sus, president of M.I.T., and first president of the American Economic
Association, did have data. He pointed out that the average size of farms
in 1880 was small, and growing smaller, contrary to George’s allegation
of increasing concentration. George objected to the use of a simple
mean; he wanted to know how much was held by the largest few. He
never used the term “Lorenz Curve,” but that was the idea. Walker, trap-
ped in an untenable position, tried to shoot his way out in an exchange
that must have embarrassed him (Walker 1883a, rpt. 1898, May, June). It
is perhaps due to this exchange that in 1900 the census began collecting
data on farms ranked and grouped by size. There was no retroactive
count, but the trend from 1900 to the present is one of rising concentra-
tion.

Later critics have avoided this issue, other than mentioning it inciden-
tally in connection with the question of whether the general property tax
is regressive. Here the main germane issue becomes the corporation.
Several studies show corporate shares to be held more closely than “real
166 LAND ASA TAX BASE

estate.” Many property tax opponents conclude from this that property
taxes exempt the wealthiest. I am not aware, however, of any systematic
study refuting the belief that corporations are our major landholders, as
documented in Gaffney (1970).

Mixed, or Shifting and Changeable Positions

Francis A. Walker thought that George overstated his case inex-
cusably. We have discussed Walker on his feelings about concentration.
He also attacks George’s forecast that rents will continue to rise with in-
creased population, because the evolution of technology is labor-saving
and resource-using, and because higher incomes lead to higher demand
for land. Walker cites M. Leroy-Beaulieu, “an economist and statistician
of eminence,” who said that rent “will soon disappear altogether”
(Walker 1883b, p. 147). Chicagoan Theodore Schultz (1953) says much
the same.

In truth, the periodic collapse of land values in our history of cyclical
territorial expansion has weakened support for land taxation; George’s
forecasts were overdrawn and premature. But now, one hundred years
later, land values are looming up as George warned.

Walker’s hostility to George is more stylistic and personal than
substantive. Walker remains a Ricardian, and tackles J. B. Clark for
treating capital as though it were fixed, like land (1888, pp. 417-35). In
Land and Its Rent, after a furious attack on George, Walker still says in
regard to the rights of property, “property in land stands lower, much
lower in the hierarchy than property in capital” (1883b, p. 198). Before he
is through, the eminent M. Leroy-Beaulieu “can command little convic-
tion” (1883b, p. 191).

Five years later, Walker has mellowed so far as to accept land taxation
as reasonable in principle but impracticable in implementation (1888, pp.
415-17).

Alfred Marshall (1920, rpt. 1947) improves upon Ricardo by con-
tributing a new concept, the “public value of land,” to help define the
desired tax base. Ricardo wrote mainly of farmland and fertility
differences and perverse readers persisted in taking this narrowly. Mar-
shall’s public value is what George means by “community-created” value,
the joint product of nature, location, public works and services, settle-
ment, and community synergy. Marshall realizes that urban location
values are outgrowing farm values, and he provides an appropriate con-
cept.

Marshall also develops a lucid statement of how high urban land costs
cause intensive land use by actuating substitution of capital for dear land
GAFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 167

(1920, rpt. 1947, chap. XI). Marshall is also clear that “from the
economic and from the ethical point of view, land must everywhere and
always be classed as a thing by itself” (1920, rpt. 1947, appendix G). He
seems to favor a kind of creeping land tax.

But Marshall is ambivalent and cautious, the very type of Harry
Truman’s two-handed economist. For every proposal there is a caveat,
for every aid to one side, comfort to the other. Any change should be
slow — during one 1883 lecture, he discusses the merit of nationalizing
land interests after one hundred years (1883, rpt. 1969). It is a sobering
thought that that centennial is now only two years away.

Marshall also contributes new concepts for the Omelette School,
which resist unscrambling land and capital. Durable capital earns “quasi-
rents,” in the short run just like land rents. Big land developers con-
sciously create values that spill over onto neighboring lands that they
own. The supply of national capital is fixed, so a uniform national tax on
building values is neutral, and not shifted (this is the “new view”
Harberger thesis again).

Marshall distinguishes “onerous” and “beneficial” local taxes. An
“onerous” rate is one which taxes property to provide services to
people — for example, “a poor-rate levied on the well-to-do” (1920, rpt.
1947, p. 794) —and so fails to give back to property a service equal to
what it pays for. This is cousin to Cannan’s tragedy-of-commons case
against taxing local land values to provide services that attract im-
migrants and congest cities. But where Cannan focuses on people moving
in, Marshall sees the wealthy moving out to the suburbs. Having raised
the issue, however, Marshall characteristically minimizes it — he says that
the rich cannot escape because tax jurisdictions are widened to catch
them in their new locations.

Still, Marshall provides the framework for today’s mischievously po-
tent slogan, that property should pay only for services to property. These
are “beneficial”; services to people are “onerous.” The viewpoint is clearly
that of the local landholder.

Marshall resented Henry George’s influence in England, and in 1883 he
took the stump against him. As with Walker, differences of style over-
rode substance, and no doubt George seemed a cocky intruder in Mar-
shall’s nation and profession. George developed his attitudes in a land
that either belonged to the national government or was only freshly
granted to private holders; Marshall’s England had its own history. Mar-
shall mainly objected to the immediacy of George’s reforms.

The mature Marshall never published these immature polemics, and
wisely so. George Stigler (1969) has exhumed them, possibly in the belief
they show the real Marshall. But yet another George (Prime Minister
168 LAND ASA TAX BASE

Lloyd) did win Marshall’s support for a British land tax when he pro-
posed it in 1909 (Hutchison 1969, pp. 248-49, n. 50). The real Alfred
Marshall is probably the one who stood up when push came to shove in

’ his native land. Hostility to an invader is one thing: conviction on princi-
ple is another.

A. C. Pigou (1949) takes a fairly clear stand in favor of using
Marshall’s public value of land as a tax base, “a moderate tax assessed at
a moderate percentage,” in a family of “different imposts.” Its strong
point is its perfect “announcement aspect,” i.e., its unavoidability and
unshiftability. It rates poorly on horizontal equity (Pigou takes “income”
as the base of reference for “equity,” without regard to sources); but rates
well on vertical equity. An added attraction is automatic recoupment of
betterment.

Pigou contributes the important concept of “announcement effect.”
Some prior economists wrote simply of taxing rent, without usually
specifying much about the actual method. Pigou likes the tax because we
can “announce” it to the taxpayer as a lump sum for the year, based on
an outside assessment, independent of taxpayer activity. It is not clear if
some earlier writers always had this in mind, or would tax rent as realiz-
ed, ex post. Today, most discussion, pro and con, premises Pigou’s con-
cept of a tax on presumptive or “notional” rent, as revealed by assessed
land value. This unfortunately confuses two questions, because there
also are income taxes on rent, and there is a case for letting taxes vary
with short term changes in realized rent (as when prices widely vary). It is
too bad Pigou never pursues this lead further. It has been left to analysts
of leasing methods to choose among different ways for a landlord to “an-
nounce” rent to a tenant, and the field is beginning to yield a vigorous
literature. Among land taxers, we will see John R. Commons emphasiz-
ing the use of income taxation to collect rent.

Karl Marx wavers in a love-hate relationship with land taxation.
Mostly it is hate. The Manifesto (Marx and Engels 1848, rpt. 1959),
demands “application of all rents of land to public purposes” (Plank 1),
but the means is never explained. The allied demands include forced
labor (Plank 8), the reverse of what land taxers intend. Still, the unfinish-
ed posthumous vol. III of Capital (1867, rpt. 1906), pieced together by
Engels, is half about ground rent. However, in The Poverty of
Philosophy (1847), Marx attacks Proudhon for pushing a tax on rental
income. He marshals technical problems of separating land and capital,
but more basically he objects to a reform so easily accommodated within
the capitalist system of market pricing. He suggests that rent might better
be distributed by lowering consumer prices — a process familiar enough
to domestic producers of “old” oil and gas today, and consistent with
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 169

Marx’s disdain for conservation. Marx also is leery of a proposal
animated by a decentralist bias, his own being the reverse. Marx seems at
times to say that only farming yields rents, because of diminishing
returns, while manufacturing yields none, because of increasing returns
—he is careless about distinguishing scale and proportions.

Finally, he opposes any reform that would make capitalism more
tolerable, and that would delay the apocalypse of his heart’s desire
(whatever that is— we know what Marx is against, but not what he is for).

E. R. A. Seligman (1895), like Francis Walker and Alfred Marshall,
followed the catharsis of a no-holds-barred attack on George by a partial
agreement on the desirability of at least some special taxation of land
(Andelson and Gaffney 1979).

There are countless other economists who have touched on one or
another aspect of the land tax case and then shifted as they aged and
changed. I leave to philosophers the case of Herbert Spencer. I do not at-
tempt a comprehensive catalogue, but hasten on to cover the more prom-
inent or currently relevant cases.

Noncommittal, Detached, or Supercilious Economists

David Ricardo, whose contributions to analytical method tower over
our subject, does not take an advocate’s role. He merely explains in short
and simple terms that a tax on rent is not shifted (1817, chap. X). Nothing
suggests that he cares if this intelligence is put to use.

That it was put to use by others is some kind of tribute to the power of
conceptualization in guiding behavior, a power clearly understood by
Clark et al. as they went about undoing Ricardo.

My guess is that Ricardo doubted the adequacy of rent for taxes,
because his treatment of other taxes has them all shifted forward, never
back into rent. He even rebukes Adam Smith on this point. Believing
this, he would not see that most taxes in an open economy come from
rent anyway.

Other and more sophisticated aspects of rent were defined by Heinrich
von Thiinen, founder of location theory; and Martin Faustmann (1849,
rpt. 1968) who mastered the mathematics of defining ground rent in
forestry when yields are slow and periodic. Both care about economizing
on land, but are not known to have written about taxing it.

Location theorists, urban land economists, and regional scientists in
large numbers deal constantly with location rents and the importance of
pressing landholders to economize on land in the measure indicated by its
rent in order to economize on transportation. They are allied with pro-

170 LAND AS A TAX BASE

fessional city planners, many of whom follow the lead of Ebenezer
Howard (1965) in promoting special taxation of situation rents. But the
theorists, oddly, have avoided tax policy questions. William Alonso
(1964) extends himself beyond the norm of this reference group when he
devotes one half of page 116 to note that a tax on land rent is neutral.

Paul Samuelson, in various editions of his text, gives statements as
lucid as any heart could desire of land rent as a taxable surplus — and
there they rest. We cannot attribute this quiescence to a reticent disposi-
tion, or to qualms against melding positive and normative economics. He
simply is detached from this issue.

Herbert Simon’s article on the incidence of a tax on urban real pro-
perty (1943) is a fine piece of thread-the-needle reasoning that suggests a
general equilibrium approach to tax incidence along lines pioneered by
Harry G. Brown, and shows that a tax on “house rental” is separable into
a tax on land and building, with different effects. He spikes Edgeworth’s
incipient fallacy that a given capital adds more to value on a more highly
rented site — an approach that could arrogate the land value to the capital
value, in the manner of Marx. There are ideas launched about housing as
a composite service combining location and building, and it is regarded
as a contribution to demand theory. Yet, if it was anything for Simon but
an intellectual game, there is no sign. In 1979, however, Simon played a
role in a successful campaign to place more of Pittsburgh’s graded pro-
perty tax on land, and less on buildings.

Frederick Babcock’s classic Valuation of Real Estate covers most of
the topics on separating land and building values over building life, on
different shaped lots, and so on (1932, see esp. chaps. 23, 30). Babcock
does for urban real estate what Faustmann did for forestry: he applies
capital theory to separate land and capital values over the long life of
durable capital. Richard Hurd (1903) earlier did for urban real estate
what von Thiinen did for regions; he showed the power of location over
land values. Anyone constructing a map of land values relies heavily on
Hurd’s work because it shows the spatial continuity of urban land values,
which is the basis for interpolating and extrapolating. While Hurd at-
tempts no formal theory, it would be hard to fault his penetrating obser-
vations of real life on any theoretical ground. Perhaps it is just as well
that Babcock and Hurd wrote for the trade, and pronounced nothing on
public policy. They illustrate that the needs of economic life demand
separate valuations for land and capital, regardless of ideologies.

It is altogether remarkable that Babcock and Homer Hoyt (1933) were
writing their classics on land values in Chicago right by Knight’s temple.
George Olcott was issuing his annual Blue Book of Chicago Land
Values. Herbert D. Simpson (1933) was studying property taxation and
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 171

land value cycles, and attributing the banking collapse to the collapse of
real estate — a point never entertained by Friedman. Chicago sociologists
Park and Burgess (1925) were pioneering their ring hypothesis of land
value, and Hoyt (1939) was developing his sector hypothesis. Wallace At-
wood was founding the discipline of economic geography, the study of
how land determines the location of human culture. They drew on the
rich and instructive experience of the vital city around them. However,
University of Chicago economists were hewing to Simon Patten’s counsel
that “economic doctrine must isolate itself more fully”; for them the land
market was ruled out of this world. The brilliance of their work in other
fields has only compounded the mischief by spreading theories from
which land was exorcised.

Friedrich Hayek (1941, pp. 87-94) like other Austrians rejects the
classical reason for distinguishing land and capital as backward-looking
and based on origin. He insists on maintaining the distinction in Austrian
economics for an appropriately forward-looking reason: “. . . capital . . .
needs replacement and in consequence leads to investment.” He rejects
Clark, Cassel, and Knight on the capital fund as “pure mysticism.” “The
distinction between capital and land is surely not an invention of the
economists. .. .”

Yet, having kept the concept pure he lets it languish, and no Austrian
has been conspicuous as a land taxer. Nor do they even enter land rent
among the carrying costs of durable capital in their treatments of
replacement timing, a matter near the heart of their theories.

Positive, but Tentative, Limited, Partial, and Remote

Developing Nations

Haskell Wald (1959) gathers together many arguments for land taxa-
tion, although the style is skittish. He anticipates one modern domestic
trend in recommending some “personal allowances” in the land tax, to
remove the regressive stinger (John Shannon’s term) and allow a higher
overall rate. He suggests the wisdom of adjusting levies for year-to-year
changes in economic rent due to weather and prices. However, after mar-
shalling a persuasive case for a tax that sharpens incentives, distributes
wealth more equitably, and is administrable and richly yielding, he sug-
gests that land taxation is a transitional tool that can be phased
downwards after developing countries acquire the accounting skills need-
ed for income taxation.

John Due (1963) is much more the observer-analyst than advocate. He
finds and records a land tax being implemented in many cities of east
Africa. He brings out the importance of land registry, surveys, and clear
172 LAND AS A TAX BASE

titles. In West Africa he generally finds that titles are so obscure, bound-
aries so unspecific, and extended families so complex that a land tax base
can hardly be defined, so property taxes concentrate on buildings. In
rural east Africa, likewise, the cadastral tradition is lacking. He might
have added that in precommercial societies community interests in land
are expressed in nonpecuniary ways.

In East African cities, however, European concepts of tenure have
been applied. Land has been commercialized, making’ land taxation
possible — and, he might have added, more appropriate, in order to com-
pensate for extinguishing ancient communal rights.

Due writes glowing reports of the modernity of land-tax
cities— Nairobi and Salisbury receive specific praise — and of high stan-
dards of administration, among both Africans and Europeans. Due
remains the careful technician, mainly discussing nuts and bolts, eschew-
ing ideologies, except when he attributes land taxation in East Africa to
“a spread of ideas of the single tax. . . from Great Britain through South
and Central Africa.and gradually into Kenya.” One gathers that the ideas
traveled in the natural way, by indigenous grapevine without benefit of
A.L.D., World Bank, Ford, U.N., or Colombo Plan, and are the firmer
rooted for it.

Due contributes to theory the cultural relativity of land taxation: it fits
where land is under tenure. On Crown and unsurveyed lands, he notes,
charging for the use of land is “the same as a program of land value rates
under freehold.” The idea is germane in our own commercial culture
where so many resources (such as highways and waters) are still without
adequate tenure control. Due also echoes Cannan’s concern about
distorting locational incentives by distributing central city rents. We still
see that Colin Clark has a solution to this.

Robert M. Haig (1915a) is both a keen observer and a theoretician. In
1915 he writes, on behalf of the city of New York, “The Exemption of Im-
provements from Taxation in Canada and the U.S.,” mainly discussing
western Canada. The title is carefully chosen. Property taxes were so low
in that part of Canada, both absolutely and relative to other revenues,
that the experience was more with exempting buildings than taxing land,
as he points out. His meager raw data on building volumes demonstrate
no clear effect on the policy. Cautious and detached though he is, he
reasons a priori and from extensive interviews that the policy has a
substantial effect in stimulating building and reducing lot sizes. As a
political observer, he notes that the policy is pushed by real estate men, in
the booster spirit. The region is growth oriented, quite the reverse of
Cannan’s England. He notes the net effect on land values is positive, and
the zeal of the boosters is not utopian, but wealth-maximizing. There is
GaFFnEy: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 173

no drying up of loanable funds, as Edgeworth feared. In a few smaller
towns, taxes have been high enough utterly to destroy “speculation”
(construed as holding vacant land for the rise). Ever circumspect, Haig
offers a left-handed conclusion: “Under certain circumstances” im-
provements can be exempted “without disastrous consequences.”

Haig contributes a practical sense of the importance of credit ration-
‘ing—a factor neglected by most theoreticians. He observes that banks
are loathe to lend on raw land, so some owners must build in order to
borrow. He conjectures that this may stimulate building, where holders
keep land for the “lure of unearned increment,” a topic that bemused
him. He feels that present land taxes hasten building, but anticipated
taxes dampen the lure of increments. The increment is not the direct
cause of stimulus: “It is rather the necessity of preserving title to that in-
crement” (1915b, p. 837). He does not determine whether this is an
economically efficient stimulus, or another “tragedy-of-commons”
misuse of rent as a stimulus, as modern economists would sense, and
Harry G. Brown replied. He likes to define contervailing forces, and to
leave us with country lawyer wisdom: “Circumstances alters cases.” Like
Due, however, he contributes a strong sense of the importance of tenure
institutions in determining the effects of land taxation.

Harold Groves contrasts Canadian and American property taxation.
Canada has narrowed the base more than we have, partly exempting im-
provements and nearly wholly exempting personal property, following
the British custom. Groves says “. . . exempting improvements . . . strikes
a responsive chord in those who, like the author, hold that land is an
especially suitable subject for taxation and that little, if any, rational
ground can be found for taxing improvements” (1948, p. 29). However,
there it rests, since he devotes his main strength to institutional matters.

American, English, and Canadian economic missionaries to LDCs
have been legion during the last 35 years of Pax Americana. I cannot
possibly name all those who have smiled on land taxation abroad, but a
representation includes Richard Bird (1974), William Rhoads (1969),
Albert Berry (1972), Erwin Johnson (1970), Richard Musgrave (1969),
Daniel Holland (1969), Robert Hardie (1952), Richard Lindholm (1965),
Richard Goode (1970), Peter Dorner (1972), John Strasma (1969, 1965),
Orville Grimes, Jr. (1977), George Lent (1967), John R. Hicks (1959),
Milton Taylor (1965), and Walker Heller (1954). Reform may be easier to
comtemplate at a distance, but dreams of far away may come to life. We
have seen Marshall shorten the count-down from one-hundred years to
“Blast off!” in 1909. Lindholm, for one, has also promoted domestic land
taxation. Heller, a student of Groves, has engineered major exemptions
of domestic capital from income taxation. John Strasma has skillfully
174 LAND AS A Tax BASE

guided a tax on net proceeds of mineral extraction—read “rent” —
through the Wisconsin legislature. Others, too, may yet bring their
messages home.

Advocates with Unresolved Reservations

J. S. Mill, like the early Marshall, would limit rent taxes to future in-
crements only. The problem turns out not to be so simple, since in a
rising market, future increments for all future time are already reflected
in land prices paid by “innocent” buyers. He recognizes fleetingly that
present land values include discounted future increments, but dances
calisthenically around this, concluding it is all right to tax future in-
crements to rent (1872, book V, chap. II). In later passages he returns to
the attack without the qualification. The existing land tax is not a tax
burden at all, but a reservation of ancient feudal rights. Landowners
should bear it silently, p/us their share of general taxes. He says profits of
capital should be taxed at a lower rate than land rent (1872, chap. III;
para. 2). The long run supply of capital is elastic because of international
. flows. (He also anticipates Domar and Musgrave by noting that taxes on
profits increase risk-taking.) “. . . among the very few kinds of income
which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these (urban) ground-rents
hold the principal place.” A house-tax, so far as it falls on the ground-
landlord, “is liable to no valid objection.” For Mill the moralist and logi-
cian, that is strong language.

In later years, Mill becomes active in the Land Tenure Reform
Association, but only after his autobiography is finished and his main
energies spent; it is almost a posthumous activity.

Most poignant is Paul Douglas’ (1972) comment in his autobiography,
concerning what might have been. Looking back, he regrets his failure to
support land taxation more vigorously. Knight’s Chicago was hardly a
hospitable matrix for a young professor so inclined, and anyway Douglas
had been trained at Columbia by J. B. Clark and nurtured on Philip
Wicksteed. Later as a U.S. Senator he did push the National Commis-
sion on Urban Problems to recommend land taxation (1968). He hopes
“St. Peter may forgive my silence . . . and accept my later efforts as at
least partial atonement” (1972, p. 446). There is no suggestion of how St.
Peter should deal with Clark and Wicksteed, who conditioned the young
mind against those efforts. To the very end Douglas calls Wicksteed “one
of my favorites . . . from whom I had learned the coordination of the
laws of production and distribution” (1972, p. 123). One could argue that
the Cobb-Douglas production function, which came from Wicksteed
(Douglas 1972, p. 46), helps condition even more minds, if not against,
then away from those efforts. As used by Wicksteed and Douglas there
GAFFNEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 175

are just two factors of production, labor and capital. The enclosure
movements, in which capital drives labor off the land and which actuated
the radicalism of both Marx and George, cannot be fitted to any
Cobb-Douglas function.

Advocates for Special Industries or Conditions

There are repeated proposals to exempt specific kinds of capital from
taxes. In forestry, Ellis Williams (1974) renews the call for a tax based on
site productivity. Fred R. Fairchild (1935) and many others have preced-
ed Williams on this topic. The problem is that there has been no effort to
calculate the equivalent rate necessary to compensate others whose
capital remains taxable. In effect, these proposals involve preferential
treatment for one industry.

Ebenezer Howard (1965) has led generations of planners toward an
ideal city financed solely from ground rents. However, Howard’s interest
in taxes is incidental, and stops at the local level.

Harold Hotelling (1938) is prominent for his marginal-cost pricing pro-
posals. While Marshall and Pigou launched the same balloon in the
abstract, Hotelling got right down to the case of regulated utilities, reviv-
ing and crediting Jules Dupuit (1844). To meet the deficits of marginal-
cost pricing with declining average costs, Marshall and Pigou suggested
taxes on increasing-cost industries (with the sideshow of some confusion
in defining increasing cost). Hotelling suggests meeting the deficit by
taxes on income, inheritance, or land. Land is an even better tax base
than increasing cost industries, says Hotelling, because there is some
deadweight loss in taxing even them; the vertical supply curve of land,
however, means there is no deadweight loss at all. As he warms to his
subject, Hotelling gives the strong impression that the ideal tax base for
meeting deficits is the land benefited by a utility or new bridge, and he
therefore forgets the income and inheritance taxes.

He recognizes that it is hard to measure benefits exactly from each pro-
ject, but urges us to more “communal spending in ways beneficial to the
public at large” — perhaps not realizing what a Pandora’s box he was
opening! At any rate, this could be interpreted to mean that land taxes
need not be limited to benefits demonstrably received from specific pro-
jects.

Hotelling’s seminal article is filled with insights on the nature of rents
and costs and congestion. In spite of immediate and recurrent attacks by
neo-Leibnitzians? such as Frisch and Little, Hotelling launched a whole

2. Leibnitz is the original for Dr, Pangloss in Voltaire’s Candide, who counsels that
reform is futile anywhere because the world is imperfect everywhere else, and all is inter-

connected. It is hard to distinguish Leibnitz’ philosophy from “second-best” theories of
welfare economics.
176 LAND As A TAx BASE

new field of utility economics and forward-looking marginal-cost pricing.

Hotelling also contributes to defining the rent of exhaustible mines.
However, here, as with his bridges, Hotelling never makes it crystal clear
what all his assumptions and conclusions are, and in the end there are
those nagging doubts over how far he is advising us to-carry the land tax
policy.

William Vickrey carries Hotelling’s ideas much further to the logical
conclusion of a thoroughgoing general shift to the land value tax. base.
To Vickrey, urban land rents are a reflection of all the economies of ur-
ban scale. Efficiency requires that these land rents “be devoted primarily
to financing the intramarginal residues” or deficits of marginal-cost pric-
ing (1969, p. 19).

The rent of mines, including oil and gas wells, is a topic of wide in-
terest. Where forest economists have sought taxes on sites only as an inci-
dent to preferential exemption of timber capital, other economists have
seen mineral rents as a particularly good tax base, with only incidental, if
any, mention of exempting capital. This biased treatment could be a
reaction to the preferences achieved by mine owners de facto, and/or to
widespread absentee ownership. Otherwise it is anomalous, because the
rent of mines is harder to separate out, and easier to defend as socially
functional, than other rents. One can blend mine rents with a return on
discovery costs, call it a fund for replacement, and so on. We have seen
Herfindahl (1974) taking this tack. Economists leaning the same way in-
clude Henry Steele (1967), Paul Bradley (1977), and Stephen McDonald
(1963, 1967, 1971). And yet, their differences from others are only those of
emphasis, not of analytical technique or concept. All four of them ex-
pound and use the concept of resource rent. McDonald has even praised
a property tax on oil deposits (1966). It is a fascinating development in
economic thought that “rent” has become the universal usage in mineral
economics, where it is most vulnerable.

A pioneer analyst of mine rents is Lewis C. Gray (1914), who also
draws together and discusses the sparse earlier treatments in Marshall,
Ricardo, B6hm-Bawerk, and Sorley. Gray divides mineral rents into two
parts, a pure income and a depletion charge, the latter variously referred
to by others as “user cost” and “royalty.” Gray insists that both are part
of rent, which he defines as the surplus above social costs. Depletion, he
says, is simply the present value of future rents foregone by present use,
and therefore part of rent. He has in mind resources which are
replaceable without high discovery costs. He does not fully face up to the
problem of long run replacement; or he may simply be taking implicit
note of the empirical fact that the bulk of replacement costs consist of
payments made to other landowners.
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 177

John Ise (1925) joins Gray’s inclination to socialize mineral rents, but
is more conservation-minded. Ise favors policies to retard the rate of use,
a position later reached by Gray as well. Ise is the intellectual idealist,
appalled at the vulgar materialism of sovereign consumers, and not at all
disturbed at making them learn the character-building discipline of
waiting. This message, of course, would be ridiculed by Joe Hill, whose
preacher tells the slave, “There’ll be pie in the sky in the sweet bye and
bye,” and by John Keynes: “In the long run we are all dead.”

Harold Hotelling (1931) supplies a classic mathematical model of mine
rents, one rightly admired by modern modelers for its rigor, but with
more than a touch of exclusionary esoteric obscurity. Hotelling tells us
we must master the calculus of variations in order to understand deple-
tion. One senses an element of pedantic ostentation, and we are grateful
that he was not also vaunting Greek and Sanskrit. The basic reasoning
and the findings are in fact much like Gray’s.

Warren Roberts (1944, 1967) reinforces the emerging Gray-Hotelling
model of resource rents. The presence of rent in mining is implied by
sharply rising marginal costs, with average cost therefore well below
price. Although Roberts is by trade a political scientist, he favors the
economic model of defining rent, and the economic solution of taxing
it. “. . . Other means, such as exchange control, tend to confuse issues
and lead away from, rather than toward, optimum understanding”
(1967, p. 215). “Accounting is not without political meaning. It educates
and puts in gear the rationality of men. . . . The practical importance of
the concept of rent lies in its near universal validity and in the ability of
intellectuals to give it proximate definition.” (1967, pp. 207-8.)

Mason Gaffney (1967) writes favorably of taxing mine rents, but not
in a discriminatory way. To him, land rents of all kinds are the tax base
of choice. As to mineral rents he treads more cautiously than Gray, see-
ing a need to reward and finance replacement, in principle. Yet, in pursu-
ing this principle he finds such a weight of institutional bias favoring
excessive and premature discovery that he sees little need for current
concern about adequacy of motivation. He seeks to devise a tax scheme
which would motivate exploration optimally while raising revenues as
well. He sees much potential rent dissipated in interest on premature ef-
fort and emphasizes the benefits of an industry operating with leaner ad-
vance reserves. Gaffney also sees rent taxation as a reform of extended
economic and social consequences, with benefits to equity, competitive
structure of industry, employment, efficiency, and social harmony.

Absentee ownership of minerals gives a fillip to our subject where in-
tellectuals find themselves in colonial settings. Canadian economists
have responded in force. Lewis C. Gray originated as a Canadian. An-
178 LAND AS A TAX BASE

thony Scott (1976) assembles a number of them in his Natural Resource
Revenues: A Test of Federalism. Contributors include Thomas J. Cour-
chene, W. D. Gainer, John Helliwell, J. Clark Leith, Milton Moore, T.
L. Powrie, Donald Smiley, and Irene Spry. Milton Moore writes, “I shall
take as my first principle that economic rents belong to the
community” (1976, p. 241). Only Paul Bradley, an American by origin,
shows major doubts. But it is characteristic of this Canadian group that
they focus solely on the rent of mines. There is no hint of extending the
taxation of rents to the commercial land of Toronto, the political land of
Ottawa, the docks of Montreal, or the fields of Manitoba.

Another Canadian writing on mineral rents is Meyer Bucovetsky of
Toronto (1972). Later, he joins with Malcolm Gillis of Harvard (1978).
Their locations may demand more circumspection than the colonial
spokesmen’s. They by no means dispute the case for taxing mineral rents,
but look at it mainly from the taxpayer’s viewpoint.

Economists are also giving great attention to collecting mineral rents
from lessees on public lands. Few challenge the old practice of giving
away water rights free, and hardly any have taken up Delworth
Gardner’s (1962) evidence of a need for higher grazing fees. But
economic writers and policy makers are vigorously pursuing the mineral
rents. Even the “conservatives” in this field, such as Mead (1977), Soren-
son (Mead and Sorenson 1980), McDonald (1979), and Kenneth Dam
(1965), do not dispute the meaning of resource rent, or the public right to
receive it. On the contrary, they proclaim it. They simply prefer leases to
be written with low royalties, no intermeddling, and a high emphasis on
the front-end bonus as the bid variable and allocating device. Others
prefer leases with more deferred payments, and “participation.” These
include Ross Garnaut and Anthony Clunies-Ross (1977), Michael Crom-
melin (1977), Mason Gaffney (1977a, 1977b), Gregg Erickson (1977),
Arlon Tussing (1977), and Robert Kalter and Wallace Tyner (1975).

The subject of rent pervades and transcends all of economic life and
policy, inescapably. (“They reckon ill who leave me out; when me they
fly, I am the wings.”) Hundreds of economists recognize rent when
capitalized into the value of taxi medallions and liquor licenses, of all
things. It is a strange quirk that so many economists recognize and con-
demn these as petty while resting so taciturn on the gross ones.

The rent of water manifests another anomaly. Hardly anyone has
responded to Gaffney’s call (1969a, 1973b) for public charges on reserving
and withdrawing water, but legions have joined Allen Kneese’s (1962)
effort to promote effluent charges for polluting water and air. But neither
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 179

movement has made much headway compared to community collection
of the rent of mines.

There is an active literature on collecting rent from the radio spectrum,
a valuable resource now allocated without any price going to the owners,
viz. the public (Levin, 1971). As with all these “exotic” resources, there
quickly emerge three camps. The first wants to collect rent publicly. The
second dismisses distributive equity and focuses on firming up existing
tenure rights. The social goal of this is to allow commercialization and
easy transfer, leading to efficient allocation. The third camp is solely con-
cerned with asserting the public right, regardless of efficiency. The
beauty of taxing rent, of course, is to achieve and harmonize the (pro-
fessed) goals of the second and third camps. It would have prevailed long
since, were the second and third camps more aware and respectful of the
validity and sustained power of each others’ half-share of truth.

Mainly Positive

Several economists have dedicated major efforts to promoting land
taxation. I pass over the most dedicated advocates, Henry George and
Harry G. Brown, because their positions are so well known, so total, and
so easily referenced. Beyond these, it is often thought there is only an
eccentric band of true believers. These eccentrics include, however,
Léon Walras, John R. Commons, Colin Clark, Dick Netzer, William
Vickrey, Lowell Harriss, Ralph Turvey, Frangois Quesnay and the
physiocrats, John Zangerle and a large group of assessors, Knut
Wicksell, and Adam Smith.

The appearance of Léon Walras (1896) here may be a surprise to those
who know him through Jaffe’s translation of selections that emphasize
abstruse techniques. Walras is a thoroughgoing land taxer, who writes
with the passion of a Gallic Henry George. A few passages give the
flavor.

“ ... In order that the total of personal faculties and their products
should belong to the individual, the State must own the land and find in its
rent the means to subsist and the source of capital it needs. The assign-
ment of land to the State solves the question of taxation by erasing it”
(1896, book II, section 8).

“Lands do not belong to all the men of one generation; they belong to
humanity, that is, to all generations of men” (1896, book II, section 6).
(Rawlsians take note.)

“In relieving the feudal aristocracy of its public duties, we neglected to
take back the soil, the enjoyment of which constituted the compensation
for these duties” (1896, book II, section 6).
180 LAND AS A TAX BASE

Walras regards himself as the carrier of the truths of Quesnay and
Turgot, “and for this to have been excommunicated from the science by
those who have led it to the point of sinking and discredit where it finds
itself today” (1896, book II, section 9). He assails Bastiat, leader of the
“Chicago School” of France. “One reaches the top by persuading himself
that lands which sell at 2000 francs the square meter have no value”
(1896, book III, section 36). Henry George never impugned the motives
of courtier economists more bitterly than Walras.

Walras devotes great care to a detailed plan of transition to land taxa-
tion, beginning from earlier compensation proposals of James Mill and
Hermann-Henri Gossen. Mill would compensate present holders at a
price capitalized from current income (similar to modern “use-value”
assessments), taking development and speculative value for the State.
Gossen would compensate at a higher price discounted from future
higher rents, relying on the State’s superior credit and lower capitaliza-
tion rate to let the State amortize the debt from future rents, and even-
tually own it clear.

Walras rejects Gossen’s rationale, finding his mathematics imprecise,
and observing (with Adam Smith) that the State’s discount rate must be
higher than that of its creditors — who also can buy land. From here he
becomes a bit vague, suggesting that when political economy has been
rescued from its venal traducers, the State could carry out such a project
and make it pay as successively higher industrial stages raise rents, aided
by a State that guides social organization better, advised by honest and
right-thinking economists. (Wicksteed expresses the same hope, from the
other side!)

Walras also treats the practical problem of separating land from
capital (1896, book IV). He refutes the idea that farmland is so fused
with fertilizers and “buried” improvements that land and capital are in-
distinguishable — he treats the capital as a revolving fund, recovered in
crop sales. He scores economists who “declare insoluble all questions
which strike them as difficult.” Walras is fun to read. “God, according to
them, in creating man said to him, ‘You will discover the compass, the
railroad, the electric telegraph, constitutional government, but you will
never discover a satisfactory tax.’ Strange malediction!” For Walras the
land tax is not a tax but co-ownership of land by the State, and the
perfect source of public revenue.

John R. Commons (1922, 1934) is another devoted land taxer, more
politically involved than most. The 1921 Grimstad Bill in Wisconsin em-
bodies his proposals. Commons urges us to modify “ability to pay” as a
canon of taxation. Social utility is also important; taxes are part of the
police power. Even if not so intended, “taxes nevertheless regulate, . . .
GAFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 181

they say to the businessman: Here is profit; there is loss.” So taxes should
vary directly with ability to pay, but inversely with service and contribu-
tions to the common wealth. Landowners as such only take from the
common wealth without returning anything. Land and its rent income
should therefore pay at the highest rate.

“Institutional doctrines” are utilitarian, looking to the future, disregard-
ing the “dogma of natural rights.” Institutionalism says we should give
“inducements to individuals to acquire wealth by increasing the com-
monwealth.” It sounds as though Commons is arguing in favor of incen-
tives and against excess burden, but he has his own way of putting things.

Like Walras, Commons is absorbed in the question of soil conserva-
tion, and equally involved in the institutional problem of winning farm
votes. He proposes a rough-and-ready 50 percent exclusion of farm land
values from the tax base, to allow for capital mixed with the soil — a pro-
posal that overlooks entirely the differences among soils, which is the
basis of Ricardo. This was really a political strategem. It mollified “the
farmers,” he claims — but the Grimstad Bill fails.

Commons writes with especial favor of “the American invention of
Special Assessments”; Marshall much earlier wrote of their use in
England, but Commons traces them to 1830 in New York. Unlike Hotell-
ing, Commons likes the idea of limiting the assessment to the cost of the
public works, and limiting public works to those thus financeable. But
even more he prefers the limitation of these assessments to land values.
He likes the common sense of early courts in seeing that public works
enhance only land values, not capital values. The legal distinction be-
tween taxes and assessments has a renewed life in post-Proposition 13
California. Many lawyers believe that “assessments” for benefits to land
fall outside the 1 percent limitations of Proposition 13; some one-fourth
of all property revenues in California are from assessments of special
districts (Zion 1979).

Commons likes rules of reason rather than absolutes: “There is a
diminishing validity of truth.” “A single truth, like a single tax, ends in its
own destruction.” So he proposes to blend the two canons of taxing the
ability to pay and untaxing the service to the community by a three-tier
income tax rate: a low rate on wages, a medium rate on capital, and a
highest rate on land income.

Unlike most Georgians, Commons sees the Federal income tax as one
tool for socializing rent. He would dispute Paul Douglas, who kept silent
on land taxation as a senator because “the issue involved local and state
governments, rather than national” (Douglas 1972, p. 446) and who
lumped accelerated depreciation together with the depletion allowance
and capital gains under the titles of “abuses” and the “citadel of
182 LAND As A TAX BASE

privilege” (1972, p. 452). Commons notes the L. H. Parker Committee
(1931) is proposing higher rates on unearned income, but failing to
distinguish land and capital. Commons proposes favoring capital by ac-
celerated depreciation. That wish has come true, but not the rest of the
package. He would not like today’s confiscatory rates on ordinary wage
income, nor 60% exclusion for unearned increments.

Commons ends by refuting Willford King’s (1921) attempt to fuse land
and capital. It is the same issue we have met several times. King wrote
from the individual view, and failed to see that “if our canon...be...
that of the economic effects of speculation on the wealth of the nation,”
then land income has no social function. Creating capital adds to the
common wealth. Acquiring land is merely a zero-sum game, as we would
say today, and worse than that if speculation and credit rationing in-
terfere with economic allocation, as George alleged.

Many assessors have become land taxers, or vice versa. We have
already cited John Zangerle. Some others are Moody of San Diego, A.
A. Pastoriza of Houston, Lawson Purdy of New York (1929), Percy
Williams of Pittsburgh, W. W. Pollock (1926), William A. Somers of St.
Paul, John Rackham of Washington, D.C., John McCutcheon of
Johannesburg, J. F. N. Murray of Australia (1969), Ted Gwartney of
British Columbia, and Hector Wilks and P. H. Clarke of England. Pur-
dy, Pollock, Somers (1901), and Murray in particular wrote extensively
on techniques of separate land valuation, fully understanding the
necessity for demonstrating the practicability of this art.

Francois Quesnay (ca. 1760, rpt. 1963), the founding physiocrat, royal
physician to Louis XVI, and precursor of input-output analysis (the
Tableau Economique) was of course a land taxer (possibly to save his pa-
tient’s health?). He defines the produit net or rent of farm land as that
which the state may tax without damage. In his zeal to discourage the
taxation of capital, he doesn’t even allow that it receives net income, but
only a recovery of principal, so any taxation will diminish the stock, and
thus also reduce produit net. This is a primitive apprehension of excess
burden. It is hard to be sure if Quesnay actually believes that capital has
no income, and that only agriculture is productive; he may be overstating
his case in a desperate effort to penetrate the slow wits who mismanaged
France. His follower Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, who later fled
the Terror and helped his son Eleuthére Irénée found the powder mill in
Delaware, believed the main idea was to keep the State from taxing
capital. Perhaps that was du Pont’s main interest. In any case, Quesnay
and Victor de Mirabeau framed a reasonable definition of land rent, and
a rationale for taxing it. Some others of the school were Mercier de la
Riviere and N. Baudeau. Its political spokesman was Baron A. R. J.
Turgot.
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 183

Knut Wicksell’s (1896) case for taxing land resembles Hotelling’s, only
Wicksell begins more timidly and ends more boldly. He begins with the
narrowest of benefit theories of taxation, the purpose being to put an
upper limit on spending. All public spending should have a positive
benefit/cost ratio at the margin; the proof of this is to be unanimous con-
sent of those taxed (at least the theoretical possibility of unanimous con-
sent) or nearly unanimous consent. Evidently, Wicksell is not thinking
here of purely transfer taxation, but of public works and services.

He deplores the use of hidden taxes, which yield such ample revenue
that States spend it wastefully, without needing to ask how to fund each
project.

Then he turns moderate. His principle will let legislatures pass pro-
posals that might otherwise fail because non-benefiting citizens will not
be taxed, and so not oppose them. It sounds like “Public Choice” —
and was indeed translated by J. M. Buchanan (Wicksell 1896).

But next he seems like Hotelling. The simple pricing or fee principle
will not do for public works, because marginal cost is far below average
cost. He is much more specific than Hotelling, though, about how to
meet deficits. The specific beneficiaries can pay, in fixed fees.

Finally, he arrives at Henry George’s ideas. Everyone knows you never
get unanimous consent from landholders to pay for public works — but
Wicksell’s unanimity rule applies only to those who hold their wealth
justly. Landholders are to have no veto. “I agree . . . wholeheartedly
with the special taxation, or better confiscation. . . of . . . the increase in
land value. . . .” Private rights to land are “. . . in open contradiction
with modern concepts of law and equity . . . society has both the right
and the duty to revise the existing property structure” (Wicksell 1896, p.
7). So we have the benefit principle construed as a tax on land values, but
with no suggestion that this tax be limited to benefits. There is a sugges-
tion, but not much more, that it be limited to future increases. “The tax
should be increased in steps to the point where the unearned windfall
profits are in principle absorbed . . .”

The tax should be levied currently — the Haig-Simons principle — and
not as a transfer tax, which would “hinder the flow of commerce.” It
should be levied not just on urban land or farmland, but all land.

Last, Wicksell declares that private land rights be narrowly limited to
those qualities of land contemplated by the original grantors; and future
resources discovered or made valuable, such as mineral rights, should be
reserved to the Crown. Think of all the natural goods that were “free” in
1896, and even 1933, and precious today.

Ralph Turvey’s (1957) analysis is characteristically terse, tight, and
practical. He never actually says he favors land taxation, but only that
the claims of the advocates are “in general correct.” He shows no interest
184 LAND AS A TAX BASE

in even bringing up the various doubts we have noted in other writers. He
writes in the English context where rates fall on occupiers, not title
holders, but he has no difficulty distinguishing impact from incidence.
He emphasizes the stimulus to urban renewal and to improved quality of
building, using simple diminishing returns concepts and marginal equa-
tion of costs and receipts. Ever practical, he discusses liquidity effects.
He notes the removal of excess burden and the resulting increase of tax-
able surplus. This is physiocracy renewed, only this time for a nation of
shopkeepers in the cities. His only reservation is a faint doubt about tax-
ing ripening land on its capital value — the Ely idea — but he does not pur-
sue this.

Lowell Harriss (1968) also emphasizes the excess burden of taxing
buildings. However, where Turvey posits diminishing returns as we add
capital to land, Harriss, like Walter Morton, emphasizes decreasing unit
costs per square foot as buildings get larger (he does not say what this
does to lot size). Of course, this would redouble the excess burden of tax-
ing buildings. Like Marx however, he may have failed to distinguish
variable scale from variable proportions.

Harriss meets part of Cannan’s argument for taxing buildings by
noting that public costs are not in proportion to building values when we
compare old and new ones. Costs are, if anything, inversely proportional
to values. As for the distortion of locational incentives that disturbed
Cannan, Harriss writes that taxing buildings leads industries to cluster in
low-tax enclaves. The result is a centrifugal bias, a major cause of sprawl
in American metropoles, and a self-reinforcing process that keeps getting
worse.

Harriss deplores the property tax on utility capital, using a muted
Hotelling-Wicksell rationale, and ends by suggesting the replacement of
all capital taxes with land taxes.

Colin Clark (1965) repeats the now familiar idea about lack of excess
burden of the land tax, in contrast to other taxes. Then he launches a
simple and original scheme for preventing the distortion of locational in-
centives caused by local taxation: “ . . . land values per head of popula-
tion should first be ascertained; then the state would impose a land tax
which exempted altogether those local authority areas where per-head
land values were low, and which rose in a progressive scale for those with
higher land values per head. Each local authority would then also impose
its own tax. . ..” Gaffney (1973a, p. 33) has also written in a similar vein,
and it seems sure that local exclusionary zoning will slowly strangle
us if we fail to move along such lines.

Dick Netzer (1966) systematically disposes of the various cases against
land taxation surveyed in our “Mainly Negative” section above, save for
Garrnev: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 185

some residual doubts about adequacy of base; these doubts subsequently
have been dropped. Netzer meets the Cannan argument by proposing to
supplement the land tax, not with a building tax but with a “family of
user charges” geared to marginal congestion costs, in the style of William
Vickrey. He recognizes that this does not address the larger question of
how to handle Marshall’s “onerous” taxes, for “services to people” — that
is, transfers.

Conclusion

‘We end where so much economics begins, with Adam Smith (1776, rpt.
1937). Smith likes land as a revenue base first because it is stable and per-
manent. Few great nations or sovereigns, looking back, have subsisted
without it — many by direct ownership of crown lands. Smith thinks that
sovereigns do a dreadful job when they try to manage land directly; he
advises them to sell it and tax it.

Smith accuses the physiocrats (rightly or wrongly) of favoring a land
tax that varies as a function of realized rather than potential rent. He
points to the excess burden of such a tax, and the lack of burden in the
fixed English land tax. Yet the English tax is out of date, so Smith pro-
poses a regular reassessment of the rental value, exempting im-
provements. Before a landlord’s improvement, Smith would assess his
land and “rate him at this valuation for such a number of years as might
be fully sufficient for his complete indemnification.” Data for updating
values are to come from a public register of lease terms, a Venetian prac-
tice. A “general survey and valuation” is also possible, but Smith thinks
this to be painful; he prefers the Venetian method.

Smith, like Ricardo, opposes “Tithes,” or any tax on gross output. But
unlike Ricardo, he sees such taxes shifted to landowners, along with their
excess burden (Ricardo saw them shifted forward). Smith does not need
Marshall to teach him about supply and demand; he uses it as a tool.

Smith believes housing to be a superior good and is not dead set
against a tax on house rents. However, he says, “Ground rents are a still
more proper subject of taxation than the rents of houses.” There is no
shifting, no decline of supply. The owner is always a “monopolist” who
charges what he can. (It is interesting how often critics like Stigler deride
George for this classical usage, as though it were peculiarly his.)

Place a tax on rent, and “no discouragement will thereby be given to
any sort of industry. The annual produce . . . of the society... might be
the same after such a tax as before. . . . Nothing can be more reasonable
than that a fund which owes its existence to the good government of the
state, should be taxed peculiarly . . .” (p. 796).
186 LAND AS A TAX BASE

If you tax stock (capital), on the other hand, it will be concealed or
removed. Worse, some forms of capital are more concealable than
others, so a tax is necessarily nonuniform. Knowing the quantity of
capital requires a deep inquisition “as no people could support” (p. 800).
How he would boggle at the inquisitions “supported” today — but capital
is never uniformly taxed. Place a tax on stock, and “not only the profits
of stock, but the rent of land and the wages of labor, would necessarily
be diminished by its removal” (p. 800). The last thought epitomizes a fair
share of both Georgian and Keynesian economics. May economics pro-
gress faster in the next two hundred years than in the last, or at least stop
retrogressing from the necessary and sufficient wisdom of the great
Adam Smith.

References

Adams, T. S. 1916. “Tax Exemption Through Tax Capitalization—A Fiscal
Fallacy.” American Economic Review 6: 271-87.

Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of
Land Rent. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.

Andelson, Robert V., and Mason Gaffney. 1979. “Seligman and His Critique
form Social Utility.” In Critics of Henry George, ed. Robert V. Andelson.
Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson Univ. Press.

Anderson, B. M., Jr. 1914. “‘Unearned Increments,’ Land Taxes, and the Build-
ing Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 28: 811-14.

Babcock, Frederick. 1932. The Valuation of Real Estate. New York: McGraw-
Hill.

Bahl, Roy W. 1968. “A Land Speculation Model: The Role of the Property Tax as
a Constraint to Urban Sprawl.” Journal of Regional Science 8, no. 2: 199-208.

Baker, John A. 1945. “Toward a Theory of Land Income.” Journal of Land and
Public Utility Economics 21: 160-66.

Berry, Albert. 1972. “Presumptive Income Tax on Agricultural Land.” National
Tax Journal 25: 169-81.

Bird, Richard M. 1960. “A National Tax on the Unimproved Value of Land: the
Australian Experience, 1910-1952.” National Tax Journal 13: 386-92.

Bird, Richard M. 1974. Taxing Agricultural Land in Developing Countries.
Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.

Bradley, Paul. 1977. “Some Issues in Mineral Leasing and Taxation Policy.” In
Mineral Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy, ed. Michael Crommelin
and Andrew Thompson. Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Bradley, Paul. 1976. “Governments and Mineral Resource Earnings.” In Natural
Resource Revenues: A Test of Federalism, ed. Anthony Scott. Vancouver:
Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Bucovetsky, Meyer. 1972. “Tax Reform in Canada: The Case of the Mining
Industry.” Ph.D. diss. Univ. of Toronto.

Bye, Carl R. 1940. Developments and Issues in the Theory of Rent. New York:
Columbia Univ. Press.
GAFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 187

Cannan, Edwin. 1907. “The Proposed Relief of Buildings from Local Rates.”
Economic Journal 17: 36-46.

Carey, Henry C. 1840. Principles of Political Economy. Philadelphia: Carey, Lea
& Blanchard.

Carver, Thomas N. 1915. Essays in Social Justice. Cambridge: Harvard Univ.
Press.

Clark, Colin. 1965. “Land Taxation: Lessons from International Experience.”
In Land Values, ed. Peter Hall. London: Sweet and Maxwell.

Clark, J. B. 1883. Capital and Its Earnings. Publications of the American
Economic Association, vol. 3, no. 2: 1-61. See the discussion with E. v.
Bohm-Bawerk, Quarterly Journal of Economics 1895-96, vols. 9, 10.

Clark, J. B. 1899. The Distribution of Wealth. New York: Macmillan,

Collier, Charles. 1979, “Clark and Patten: Exemplars of the New American
Professionalism.” In Critics of Henry George, ed. Robert Andelson. Ruther-
ford, N.J.: Fairleigh-Dickinson Univ. Press.

Commons, John R. 1922. “A Progressive Tax on Bare Land Value.” Political
Science Quarterly 37: 41-68.

Commons, John R. 1934. Institutional Economics: Its Place in Political
Economy. New York: Macmillan.

Cornick, Philip H. 1934. “Land Prices in a Commodity Price System.” Journal of
Land and Public Utility Economics 10: 217-31.

Crommelin, Michael. 1977, “Concluding Note: Economic Rent and Government
Objectives.” In Mineral Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy, eds.
Michael Crommelin and Andrew Thompson. Vancouver: Univ. of British Col-
umbia Press.

Dam, Kenneth, 1965. “Oil and Gas Licensing in the North Sea.” Journal of Law
and Economics 8: 51-75.

Dam, Kenneth. 1970. “Pricing of North Sea Gas in Britain.” Journal of Law and
Economics 13: 11-44,

Darwin, Leonard. 1907. “The Taxation of Site Values with Reference to the Dis-
tribution of Population.” Economic Journal 17: 330-44.

Davenport, H. J. 1909. “Exhausted Farms and Exhausting Taxation.” Journal of
Political Economy 17: 354-62.

Davenport, H. J. 1917. “Theoretical Issues in the Single Tax.” American Eco-
nomic Review 7: 1-30.

Dorau, Herbert, and Albert Hinman. 1928. Urban Land Economics. New York:
Macmillan.

Dorner, Peter. 1972. Land Reform and Economic Development, Harmonds-
worth: Penguin Books.

Douglas, Paul. 1972. In the Fullness of Time. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.

Douglas, Paul. 1968. “Supplementary Views on the Taxation of Land Values.”
In Building the American City. Report of the National Commission on Urban
Probiems. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office.
188 LAND AS A TAX BASE

Due, John. 1963. Taxation and Economic Development in Tropical Africa.
Cambridge: The Massachussetts Institute of Technology Press.

Edgeworth, Francis Y. 1906. “Recent Schemes for Rating Urban Land Values.”
Economic Journal \6: 66-77.

Ely, R. T. 1920. “Land Speculation.” Journal of Farm Economics 2: 121-36.

Ely, R. T. 1922. “The Taxation of Land.” In Proceedings of the 14th Annual Con-
Jerence of the NTA, 241-54. Harrisburg, Pa.: National Tax Association.

Erickson, Gregg. 1977. “Work Commitment Bidding.” In Mineral Leasing as an
Instrument of Public Policy, eds. Michael Crommelin and Andrew Thomp-
son. Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Fairchild, Fred R., et al. 1935. Forest Taxation in the United States. United States
Department of Agriculture, Miscellaneous Publication 218. Washington: The
department.

Faustmann, Martin. 1849. Reprint 1968. “Calculation of the Value which Forest
Land and Immature Stands Possess for Forestry.” In Martin Faustmann and
the Evolution of Discounted Cash Flow, ed. M. Gane, trans. W. Linnard. Ox-
ford: Commonwealth Forestry Institute: The University.

Fetter, Frank A. 1927. Reprint 1977. Capital, Interest, and Rent. Kansas City:
Sheed Andrews & McMeel.

Fillebrown, C. B. 1907. “The Single Tax.” National Tax Association Bulletin,

_ Vol. 1, pp. 286-93.

Fillebrown, C. B. 1910. “The Taxation of Privilege.” The Outlook 94:311-13.

Fillebrown, C. B. 1914. Taxation. Chicago: A.C. McClurg.

Fillebrown, C. B. 1916. The ABC of Taxation. 4th ed. Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, Page, & Co.

Frisch, Ragnar. 1939. “The duPuit Taxation Theorem.” Econometrica 7:145-50.

Gaffney, Mason. 1967. “Editor’s Conclusion.” In Extractive Resources and
Taxation, ed. Mason Gaffney. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Gaffney, Mason. 1969a. “Economic Aspects of Water Resources Policy.” Ameri-

can Journal of Economics and Sociology 28:131-44.

Gaffney, Mason. 1969b. “Land Rent, Taxation, and Public Policy.” Papers of the
Regional Science Association 23: 141-53.

Gaffney, Mason. i970. “Adequacy of Land as a Tax Base.” In The Assessment of
Land Value, ed. Daniel Holland. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Gaffney, Mason. 1971. “The Property Tax is a Progressive Tax.” In Proceedings
of the National Tax Association, 1971. Columbus, Ohio: The association.

Gaffney, Mason. 1973a. “A Critique of Federal Water Policy.” In The Political
Economy of Federal Policy, eds. Robert Hamrin and Robert Haveman. New
York: Harper & Row.

Gaffney, Mason. 1973b. “Tax Reform to Release Land.” In Modernizing Urban
Land Policy, ed. Marion Clawson. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.
Gaffney, Mason. 1977a. “Objectives of Government Policy in Leasing Mineral

Lands.” In Mineral Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy, ed. Michael

Crommelin and Andrew Thompson. Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia
Press.
GaFFNneEy: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 189

Gaffney, Mason. 1977b. “Oil and Gas Leasing Policy: Alternatives for Alaska.”
A Report to the State of Alaska, Department of Natural Resources.

Gaffney, Mason. 1979. “Review and Recollection Related to Resource Economics:
Selected Works of Orris C. Herfindahl.” Natural Resources Journal October:
1006-1010.

Gardner, Delworth. 1962. “Transfer Restrictions and Misallocation in Grazing
Public Range.” Journal of Farm Economics 44: 50-63.

Garnaut, Ross, and Anthony Clunies-Ross. 1977. “A New Tax for National
Resources Projects.” In Mineral Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy,
ed. Michael Crommelin and Andrew Thompson. Vancouver: Univ. of British
Columbia Press.

Gillis, Malcolm, et al. 1978. Taxation and Mining. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger.

Goode, Richard. 1964. “Reconstruction of Foreign Tax Systems.” Readings on
Taxation in Developing Countries, ed. Richard Bird and O. Oldman.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Gillis, Malcolm, et. al. 1978. Taxation and Mining. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger.

Goode, Richard. 1964. “Reconstruction of Foreign Tax Systems.” Readings on
Taxation in Developing Countries, eds. Richard Bird and O. Oldman.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Gray, Lewis C. 1914. “Rent under the Assumption of Exhaustibility.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 28: 464-89.

Grimes, Orville, Jr. 1977. “Urban Land and Public Policy: Social Appropriation
of Betterment.” In Local Service Pricing Policies, etc. ed. Paul Downing.
Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Groves, Harold. 1948. “The Property Tax in Canada and the United States.”
Land Economics 24: 23-30; 120-28.

Groves, Harold. 1949. “Impressions of Property Taxation in Australia and New
Zealand.” Land Economics 25: 22-28.

Hagman, Donald. 1978. “Land Value Taxation.” In Windfalls for Wipeouts, ed.
Donald Hagman and Dean Misczynski. Chicago: Planners Press.

Haig, Robert M. 1915a. The Exemption of Improvements from Taxation in
Canada and the United States. New York: The Committee on Taxation.

Haig, Robert M. 1915b. “The Effects of Increment Taxes upon Building
Operations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 29: 829-40.

Haig, Robert M. 1915c. Some Probable Effects of the Exemption of Improve-
ments from Taxation in the City af New York. New York: Press of Clarence
Nathan.

Hall, Peter, ed. 1965. Land Values. London: Sweet and Maxwell.

Hardie, Robert S. 1952. “Philippine Land Tenure Reform.” Special technical and
economic mission, U.S. Mutual Security Agency, Manila. Lithographed and
bound.

Harriss, Lowell. 1968. “Economic Evaluation of Real Property Taxes.” In
Municipal Income Taxes, ed. R. H. Connery. New York: Academy of Political
Science.

Hayek, Friedrich. 1936. “The Mythology of Capital.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 50: 199-228.

Hayek, Friedrich. 1941. The Pure Theory of Capital. London: Macmillan.

Hayes, H. Gordon. 1920. “The Capitalization of the Land Tax.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 34: 373-80.
190 LAND AS A TAX BASE

Heilbrun, J. 1966. Real Estate Taxes and Urban Housing. New York: Columbia
Univ. Press.

Heller, Walter W. 1954. “The Use of Agricultural Taxation for Incentive Pur-
poses.” In Papers and Proceedings of the Conference on Agricultural Taxation
and Economic Development, ed. Haskell Wald and Joseph Froomkin. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard Law School.

Herfindahl, Orris. 1974. Resource Economics: Selected Works of Oris C. Her-
findahl, ed. David Brooks. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Hibbard, Benjamin H. 1930. “A National Policy to Conserve Land Values.”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 148: 115-19.

Hirschman, Albert. 1964. “Land Taxes and Land Reform in Colombia.” In
Readings on Taxation in Developing Countries, ed. Richard Bird and Oliver
Oldman. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Hobson, J. A. 1920. Taxation in the New State. New York: Harcourt Brace and
Howe.

Hobson, J. A. 1931. Poverty in Plenty: The Ethics of Income. New York:
Macmillan.

Holland, Daniel. 1969. “A Study of Land Taxation in Jamaica.” In Land and
Building Taxes: Their Effect on Economic Development, ed. Arthur P.
Becker. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Hotelling, Harold. 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources.” Journal of
Political Economy 39: 137-75.

Hotelling, Harold. 1938. “The General Welfare in Relation to the Problems of
Taxation and of Railway and Utility Rates.” Econometrica 6: 242-69.

Howard, Ebenezer. 1965. The Garden City of Tomorrow. Cambridge: The
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.

Hoyt, Homer. 1933. One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago. Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press.

Hoyt, Homer. 1939. The Structure and Growth of Residential Neighborhoods in
American Cities. Washington: Federal Housing Authority.

Hutchison. T. W. 1969. “Economists and Economic Policy in Britain after 1870.”
History of Political Economy 1: 231-55.

Ise, John. 1925. “The Theory of Value as Applied to Natural Resources.”
American Economic Review 15: 28-91.

Jensen, Jens P. 1931. Property Taxation in the United States. Chicago: Univ. of
Chicago Press.

Johnson, Alvin. 1902. Rent in Modern Economic Theory. AEA Publications.
Third Series 3, no. 4.

Johnson, Alvin. 1914, “The Case Against the Single Tax.” The Atlantic Monthly
113: 27-37.

Johnson, Erwin. 1970, “Land Tax and Its Impact on Use and Ownership in Rural
Japan.” Economic Development and Cultural Change. 19: 49-70.

Kalter, Robert; Wallace Tyner; and Daniel Hughes. 1975. “Alternative Energy
Leasing Strategies and Schedules for the Outer Continental Shelf.” Depart-
ment of Agricultural Economics, Cornell University.

Keiper, Joseph, Ernest Kurnow, et al. 1961. Theory and Measurement of Rent.
Philadelphia: Chilton.
GaFFney: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 191

King, Willford I. 1921. “Earned and Unearned Income.” Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science: 240-60.

King, Willford I. 1924. “The Single-Tax Complex Analyzed.” Journal of Political
Economy 32: 604-12.

Kneese, Allen. 1962. Water Pollution. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Knight, Frank. 1924. Reprint 1952. “Some Fallacies in the Interpretation of Social
Cost.” In Readings in Price Theory, ed. G. Stigler and K. Boulding. Chicago:
R. D. Irwin.

Knight, Frank. 1946. “Capital and Interest.” Encyclopedia Brittanica 4: 779-801.

Knight, Frank. 1953. “The Fallacies in the ‘Single Tax.’ ” The Freeman, 809-11.

Kurnow, Ernest. 1960. “Land Value Trends in the United States.” Land
Economics 36: 341-48.

Kurnow, Ernest. 1961. “Distribution and Growth of Land Values.” In Theory
and Measurement of Rent, Joseph Keiper, et al. Philadelphia: Chilton.

Lawrence, Elwood. 1957. Henry George in the British Isles. East Lansing:
Michigan State Univ. Press.

Lent, George E. 1967. “The Taxation of Land Value.” /.M.F. Staff Papers 14, no.
1: 89-123.

Levin, Harvey. 1971. The Invisible Resource. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ.
Press.

Lindholm, Richard. 1964. Economic Development Policy. Eugene: Univ. of
Oregon Press.

Lindholm, Richard. 1965. “Land Taxation and Economic Development.” Land
Economics 41: 121-30.

Little, I. M. D. 1950. Reprint 1960. A Critique of Welfare Economics. London:
Oxford Univ. Press.

Marling, Alfred E., chairman. 1916. Final Report of the Committee on Taxation
of the City of New York. New York: The O'Connell Press.

Marshall, Alfred. 1883. Reprint 1969. “Three Lectures on Progress and Poverty.”
Journal of Law and Economics 12: 181-226.

Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Reprint 1947. Principles of Economics. 8th ed. London:
Macmillan.

Marx, Karl. 1847. The Poverty of Philosophy. New York: International
Publishers.

Marx, Karl. 1867. Reprint 1906. Capital, trans. Samuel Moore and Edward
Aveling. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr.

Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. 1848. Reprint 1959. “Manifesto of the Com-
munist Party.” In Marx and Engels, ed. Lewis Feuer. Garden City, N.Y., trans
Samuel Moore: Doubleday.

McCulloch, John. 1979. “Site Value Rating in Johannesburg, South Africa.” In
The Taxation of Urban Property in Less Developed Countries, ed. Roy W.
Bahl. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

McDonald, Stephen. 1963. Federal Tax Treatment of Income from Oil and Gas.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

McDonald, Stephen. 1966. “The Effects of Severance vs. Property Taxes on
Petroleum Conservation.” In Proceedings of the National Tax Association,
1965. Columbus, Ohio: The association.
192 LAND AS A TAX BASE

McDonald, Stephen. 1967; “Percentage Depletion, Expensing of Intangibles, and
Petroleum Conservation.” In Extractive Resources and Taxation, ed. Mason
Gaffney. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

McDonaid, Stephen. 1979. The Leasing of Federal Lands for Fossil Fuel Pro-
duction. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Mead, Walter. 1977. “Cash Bonus Bidding for Mineral Resources.” In Mineral
Leasing as an Instrument of Public Policy, ed. Michael Crommelin and An-
drew Thompson. Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Mead, Walter, and Philip E. Sorenson. 1980. “Competition and Performance in
OCS Oil and Gas Lease Sales and Lease Development, 1954-69.” Final report,
USGS contract no. 14-08-0001-16552.

Mieszkowski, Peter. 1970. “A Critical Appraisal of Land Value Taxation.”
Draft, pp. 1-37.

Mill, John S. 1872. Principles of Political Economy. People’s ed. Boston: Lee and
Shepard.

Moore, Milton. 1976. “The Concept of a Nation and Entitlements to Economic
Rents.” In Natural Resource Revenues: A Test of Federalism, ed. Anthony
Scott. Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Murray, J. F. N. 1969. Principles and Practice of Valuation. 4th ed. Sydney:
Commonwealth Institute of Valuers.

Musgrave, Richard. 1950. “A Graduated Land Tax.” In The Basis of a Develop-
ment Program for Colombia, pp. 384-87. Washington, D.C.: The Interna-
tional Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Netzer, Dick. 1966. Economics of the Property Tax. Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.

Olcott, George C. 1910-1979. Land Values Blue Book of Chicago and Suburbs.
Chicago: G.C. Olcott. Annual Volumes.

Pareto, Vilfredo. 1897. Cours d’Economie Politique. Lausanne: Libraririe de
PUniversitie, vol. 2.

Park, R. E., and Burgess, E. W. 1925. The City. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.

Parker, L. H. 1931. Preliminary Report on Earned Incomes. Report of the Joint
Committee (on Internal Revenue and Taxation) to the Committee on Ways
and Means of the House of Representatives.

Patten, Simon. 1908. “The Conflict Theory of Distribution.” Yale Review, 17:
156-84.

Pigou, A. C. 1949. A Study in Public Finance. 3d rev. ed. London: Macmillan.

Pilack, Edward. 1915. “Reduction of Tax on-Buildings in the City of New York.”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 58: 183-88.

Pollock, Walter William, and Karl W. H. Scholz. 1926. The Science and Practice
of Urban Land Valuation: An Exposition of the Somers Unit System.
Philadelphia: Manufacturer’s Appraisal Co.

Purdy Lawson. 1929.. The Assessment of Real Estate. 4th ed. New York:
National Municipal League.

Quesnay, Francois. ca. 1760. Reprint 1963. Various works. In The Economics of
Physiocracy, trans. R. Meek. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.
GaFFNEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Rents 193

Ratcliff, Richard. 1950. “Net Income Can’t Be Split.” Appraisal Journal 18:
168-72.

Rhoads, William, and Richard Bird. 1969. “The Valorization Tax in Colombia.”
In Land and Building Taxes: Their Effect on Economic Development, ed.
Arthur P. Becker. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Ricardo, David. 1817. Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. London: J.
Murray.

Roberts, Warren. 1944. State Taxation of Metallic Deposits. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard Univ. Press.

Roberts, Warren. 1967. “Mine Taxation in Developing Countries.” In Extractive
Resources and Taxation, ed, Mason Gaffney. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin
Press.

Robinson, Joan. 1933. The Economics of Imperfect Competition. London:
Macmillan.

Rolph, Earl. 1954. Theory of Fiscal Economics. Berkeley: Univ. of California
Press.

Rose, Louis A. 1971. “Taxation of Land Value Increments Attributable to Rezon-
ing.” Honolulu: Economic Research Center, 1-61.

Russell, Bertrand. 1945. Reprint 1967. History of Western Philosophy. London:
G. Allen and Unwin.

Schultz, Theodore. 1953. The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Scott, Anthony. 1967. “The Theory of the Mine under Conditions of Certainty.”
In Extractive Resources and Taxation, ed. Mason Gaffney. Madison: Univ. of
Wisconsin Press.

Scott, Anthony. 1976. “Who Should Get Natural Resource Revenues?” In
Natural Resource Revenues: A Test of Federalism, ed. Anthony Scott. Van-
couver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Seligman, E. R. A. 1895. Reprint 1923. Essays in Taxation. New York: Macmillan.

Seligman, E. R. A. 1916. “Tax Exemption Through Tax Capitalization: a Reply.”
American Economic Review 6, 790-807.

Shannon, H. L., and H. M. Bodfish. 1929. “Increments in Land Values in
Chicago.” Journal of Land and Public Utility Economics 5: 29-47.

Shoup, Carl. 1940. “Capitalization and Shifting of the Property Tax.” Property
Taxes. Symposium conducted by the Tax Policy League. New York: The
League.

Shoup, Donald C. 1969. “Advance Land Acquisition by Local Governments.”
Yale Economic Essays 9, no. 2: 147-202.

Shoup, Donald C. 1970. “Optimal Timing of Urban Land Development.” Papers
of the Regional Science Association 25: 37-39.

Simon, Herbert. 1943. “Incidence of a Tax on Urban Real Property. ” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 57: 398-420.

Simpson, Herbert D. 1933. “Real Estate Speculation and the Depression.” Pro-
ceedings of AEA 23 (supplement): 163-71.
194 LAND AS A TAX BASE

Simpson, Herbert D., and E. R. Burton. 1931. The Valuation of Vacant Land in
Suburban Areas. Evanston: Northwestern Univ. Press.

Skouras, A. 1977. Land and Its Taxation in Recent Economic Theory. Athens,
Greece: Papazissis.

Smith, Adam. 1776. Reprint 1937, The Wealth of Nations, 5th ed. New York:
Modern Library.

Smith, Rogers. 1979. “The Effects of Land Taxes on Development Timing and
Rates of Change in Land Prices.” In The Taxation of Urban Property in Less
Developed Countries, ed. Roy W. Bahl. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Somers, William A. 1901. The Valuation of Real Estate for the Purpose of
Taxation. St. Paul, Minn.: Rich and Clymer.

Spahr, Charles B. 1891. “The Single Tax.” Political Science Quarterly 6: 625-34.

Steele, Henry. 1967. “Natural Resource Taxation: Resource Allocation and Dis-
tribution Implications.” In Extractive Resources and Taxation, ed. Mason
Gaffney. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Stigler, George. 1941. Production and Distribution Theories. New York: Mac-
millan.

Stigler, George. 1947. The Theory of Price. New York: Macmillan.

Stockfisch, J. A. 1956. “Capitalization, Allocation and Investment Effects of
Asset Taxation.” Southern Economic Journal 22: 317-29.

Stockfisch, J. A. 1957. “Investment Incentive, Taxation, and Accelerated
Depreciation.” Southern Economic Journal 24: 28-40.

Strasma, John. 1969. “Property Taxation in Chile.” In Land and Building Taxes,
ed, Arthur Becker. Univ. of Wisconsin Press.

Taylor, Milton, et al. 1965. Fiscal Survey of Colombia. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins Univ. Press.

Turvey, Ralph. 1957. The Economics of Real Property. London: George Allen
and Unwin.

Tussing, Arlon. 1977. “The Role of Public Enterprise.” In Mineral Leasing as an
Instrument of Public Policy, ed. Michael Crommelin and Andrew Thompson.
Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia Press.

Vickrey, William. 1969. “External Economies in Urban Development.”
Proceedings of The American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association,
ed. Stephen Messner.

Wald, Haskell. 1959. Taxation of Agricultural Land in Underdeveloped
Economies. Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press.

Walker, Francis A. 1883a. Reprint 1898. Letters to’ Frank Leslie’s Illustrated
Newspaper. In George, Henry. Social Problems. New York: Doubleday and
McClure.

Walker, Francis A. 1883b. Land and Its Rent. London: Macmillan.

Walker, Francis A. 1888. Political Economy. 3d ed. New York: H. Holt.

Walras, Léon. 1896. Studies in Social Economics. Lausanne: F. Rouge and Co.,
Inc. Unpublished trans. M. Gaffney, 1967.

Wicksell, Knut. 1896. “A New Principle of Just Taxation,” trans. J. M.
Buchanan. In Classics in the Theory of Public Finance, ed. R. A. Musgrave
and A. T. Peacock. New York: Macmillan, 1958.
GaFENEY: Economic Thought on Taxation of Land Renis 195

Wicksteed, Philip. 1914. “The Scope and Method of Political Economy.”
Economic Journal 24: 1-23.

Wieser, F. F. von. 1909. Reprint 1960. “The Theory of Urban Ground Rent.” In
Essays in European Economic Thought, ed. L. Sommer, New York: Van
Nostrand.

Williams, Ellis. 1974. “Site Value Taxation.” National Tax Journal 27: 29-44.

Zangerle, John A. 1927. Principles of Real Estate Appraisal. 2d ed. Stanley
McMichael Publishing Organization.

Zion, William. 1979. “Special Districts: A Special Tax Limitation Problem.” The
Urban Interest Spring: 75-80.
