Alfred Russel Wallace’s Campaign
to Nationalize Land:
How Darwin’s Peer Learned from Jobn Stuart Mill and
Became Henry George’s Ally
By MASON GAFFNEY*

Apsrracr Alfred Russel Wallace rose to fame with Charles Darwin: They
independently found the principle of natural selection. Wallace later fo-
cused on reforming Great Britain’s land tenure system, under which a few
owners had come to control most of the Jand, while most citizens had little
or none of their own. In Land Nationalization (1882) Wallace proposed for
the state to acquire all land, with limited compensation. The state would
then lease it by auction, but to actual users only. Wallace saw his kinship
with Henry George, and opened doors to help George tour Britain as a
speaker. For years their ideas were linked by friend and foe, and together
had great impact on British politics.

Alfred Russel Wallace would have bolted upright to see a 1987 article on
side-effects of vaccination. Pierce Wright, Science Editor of The London
Times, reported that a WHO researcher found smallpox vaccination to be
spreading AIDS in Africa (11 May 1987).

One hundred years ago, Wallace (1823-1913) had questioned what he
saw as the uncritical vogue for smallpox vaccination, chic and “scientific”
in his day. He analyzed data to show it was likely to do more harm than
good, and publicized his claims. For this “political incorrectness” he was
attacked and ridiculed. Whether he was right then, or now, is not the pres-
ent subject nor my expertise. It just shows the kind of man he was: his own
man, inner-directed, collecting his own data and interpreting them himseff,
unswayed by cheering or jeering from the crowd. We may surmise he might

* [Mason Gaffney is a Professor of Economics at the University of California, Riverside.)
His interests include urban economics, land and resource economics, public finance, and
the history of economic thought. Recently, he published with coauthor Fred Harrison,
The Corruption of Economics (London: Shepheard-Walwyn Ltd., 1994), and “Land as a
Distinctive Factor of Production” in N. Tideman, ed., Land and Taxation (London: Shep-
heard-Walwyn Ltd., 1994).

American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 56, No. 4 (October 1997).
© 1997 American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Inc.
610 American Journal of Economics and Sociology
dislike the oppressiveness of modern peer review, too, although he was
on intimate terms with his own peers in his own. profession.

Who was Alfred Russel Wallace that we should be mindful of him? He
was the independent codiscoverer of the principle of natural selection, and
coauthor of the theory of evolution. He and his friend Charles Darwin
announced these simultaneously, and published their independent find-
ings in the same proceedings in 1858. Many believe that Wallace was first,
but he was not one to press such a claim, nor to give it any importance.
He was a simple, modest man with no ego problems.

Wallace was a man who jumped disciplinary lines—critics would say
“like a grasshopper,” but we will see he landed on economic policy with
the thud of a 400 pound gorilla. As Darwin’s peer (and possible predeces-
sor), his opinions were widely sought and heeded in many fields by socia!
leaders. He mingled with Brahmins in Boston, Robber Barons in California,
and a U.S. President in Washington. The success of natural selection gave
natural scientists new authority to prescribe rules of social conduct.

Wallace also leapt into political economy. His invasion was probably a
good thing. Political economy has benefited from many interlopers. Francois
Quesnay was a physician; Adam Smith a philosopher; David Ricardo a bro-
ker and sometime MP; John Stuart Mill a customs official and sometime MP;
Thomas Robert Malthus and Philip Wicksteed, clergymen; Karl Marx a some-
time journalist and professional revolutionary; Johann Heinrich von Thiinen
a baron; Henry George a journalist, Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk a bureaucrat;
Francis A. Walker a military general; and William Vickrey a mathematician.

Today, economists have become isolated even from each other, many
of them deep in their private pigeonholes paltering over pointless pata-
doxes with a few pals prating in their own peculiar patois. Francis A. Wal-
ker in 1886 already was complaining about isolation and narcissism within
the profession, yet his contemporaries were Renaissance men compared
with many economists today. Ironically, at the same time, some emerge
from their cubbyholes to become imperialists who flatter themselves with
such titles as “The Expanding Domains of Economics” (friendship and ad-
miration stay me from naming those authors).

The years have taught me that economists are difficult. They want to rule
you by messing with your minds, but at the same time keep you at a dis-
tance with bafflegab. To get some forward motion, outside stimuli help.
Wallace applied a strong one.
Alfred Russel Wallace on Land 611

Wallace invaded political economy {as it was then called) along a route
he knew well: land economics. Like George Washington and Anthony
Wayne, he had been a surveyor. As a zoologist he was best known as a
zoogeographer (The Geographical Distribution of Animals, 1876). He had
drawn the “Wallace Line” through the Makassar Straits: crookeder and trick-
ier than the Mason-Dixon Line, and marking a more ancient, enduring sep-
aration (that between Indo-Malayan and Austro-Malayan fauna). Wallace’s
insights were not just into man and nature, but man and nature in relation
to land.

We might easily, but wrongly, infer that he entered political economy as
an élitist eugenicist, a 19th Century Garrett Hardin. His peers did. Darwin
was related to Francis Galton, a eugenicist, and Darwin was inspired by
Thomas Malthus, the original and most dismal of dismal scientists. Malthus
had prescribed famine, pestilence, warfare and other instruments of death
as remedies for poverty, somewhat as Hardin wrote understandingly of the
need to push excess people out of overcrowded lifeboats.

Other contemporaries moving parallel to Darwin, like Thomas Henry
Huxley and Sumner and Herbert Spencer, had reinforced that impression.
Spencer, who coined the unfortunate term “survival of the fittest,” had also
said society can progress only by slow race improvement that results from
eliminating the unfit. Unfitness was manifested by poverty: this idea recy-
cled Calvinism into the new secular theology of evolutionism. Huxley de-
voted chapters in several books to defending the concentrated control of
land in England, and attacking the egalitarian land reformer, Henry George.
Huxley’s ideal was nature “red of tooth and claw.” William Graham Sumner
of Yale used Darwin to buttress Malthus. He subordinated all values to
acquiring property, which in his view was the highest virtue (Bannister,
p. 112).

People came to call the élitists “social Darwinists,” although Darwin him-
self stayed discreetly mum on such matters. He stuck to his last and kept
his reputation as a scientist (in spite of his odd belief in inheritance of
acquired traits). He did not, however, disown the term “social Darwinism,”
so perhaps he deserves being stuck with it, for better or worse. It was his
name, after all, and a man has certain rights over his own name.

One can unearth scattered evidence in Spencer, Huxley and Sumner that
they would temper the harshness of their doctrines. I suggest dismissing
most of the temperance as double-talk. One may interpret the forked
612 American Journal of Economics and Sociology

tongue of ambiguity by finding the bottom line. What all three did was
devote major effort to defending concentrated ownership of land, even in
the radically extreme and novel form it took in England after the vast en-
closure movements of the early 19th Century.

For them, the relationship of man and nature must be filtered through
pre-existing socio-political arrangements. This meant that “Nature” be-
longed to a tiny fraction of the population. “Natural selection” among hu-
mans, thus, did not take place each generation; the results of earlier strife,
politics and predation were to be frozen, sanctified, and held fixed through
all generations. This “acquired characteristic” was to stay within families.
Under English law, this took an even more extreme form than simple in-
heritance. Estates went solely to the eldest son, in trust for bis eldest son,
and so on. Land was to be free of tax on either inheriting or holding it.

Wallace was different, at the other pole from Huxley et al. It says a lot
for the civility and tolerance of Victorians and scientists that Huxley and
Wallace remained personal friends and mutual fans. They were able to
dispute social policy, even at the gut-wrenching level discussed here, and
remain loyal and supportive. May their honorable example instruct us.

Unlike the three “social Darwinians,” Wallace saw mental, social, and
spiritual factors guiding human evolution. He put his scientist's prestige on
the popular side of social issues.

Land policy was at the focus of social controversy. Wallace objected to
the clearances of the times, and past enclosures, and Irish landlordism, and
Dickensian slums where desperate evictees went for refuge, however dis-
mal. In The Malay Archipelago (1869), a book on natural science, he di-
gressed to describe the natives as mote truly civilized than his own people
at home—a commonplace, perhaps, among anthropologists today, but a
rude shocker in Victorian Britain.

John Stuart Mill rurned increasingly towards land reform in his later years,
1871-73. He formed and led the Land Tenure Reform Association, and
sought Wallace out to join it. Mill was brilliant, penetrating and understand-
ing, but ever-cautious—he built for later radicals the stage on which he
himself was uncomfortable performing. He limited his policy objective to
taxing away only future increments of land value (or perhaps of rent).
Wallace deferred to Mill, the veteran economist and social leader. Mill was
called the “Saint of Socialism,” who scrupled at the wrong he might do in
undoing other wrongs inherited from the past, gross and recent as these
Alfred Russel Wallace on Land 613
were. Wallace had no problem playing second fiddle, as he did earlier for
Darwin, and later for Henry George.

After Mill died, however, Wallace grew more importunate. The Irish land
agitation especially moved him. In 1880 he criticized Parnell’s program for
Irish peasant proprietorship as not abolishing privilege, but merely reshuf-
fling some land titles from a smaller to a larger minority. Wallace sought
more thoroughgoing and lasting systemic change.

In 1881 Wallace took the lead. He formed The Land Nationalization So-
ciety on his lines, with himself as President. In Land Nationalization(1882)
he laid out his program. The state was to assume title to all land. To meet
a conservative debating ploy, he would compensate present landowners.
However, he ingeniously minimized the amount in a manner that tells us
he knew the nuts and bolts of his subject. Compensation was to be an
annuity limited to the duration of lives in being. It was to be based only
on the net income actually being derived from the land before nationali-
zation—i.e. not from the highest and best use, and not from future
higher uses.

All men and women (Wallace, like Mill, was also a feminist) could now
bid to lease parcels from the state for actual use. In the socio-biological
terms in which he thought, this would consummate the natural relation of
man to nature. It would also let men alternate between industry and agri-
culture as Wallace, a loving gardener, himself did.

Wallace’s Land Nationalization was individualist, not collectivist. Individ-
ual lessees were to have secure tenure, and tenant-rights to improvements.
Rents to the state would be used, not to engross the state, but to obviate
taxes. These rents would be based on the assessed “inherent value” of land,
dependent only on natural and social conditions. As a surveyor and a bio-
geographer, Wallace readily distinguished “inherent value” from man’s im-
provements to land, which he saw as transitory. Tax assessors in most
American states and other former English colonies distinguish land and
improvements routinely today, and many did then, too, although in En-
gland itself the concept was somewhat novel.

Present holders would lose the right to sell; to bequeath; and to let land.
They could only hold what they occupied and used themselves. Wallace
the evolutionist saw land inheritance as a dysgenic factor giving an artificial
advantage to unfit heirs, both individually and in their collective power to
control social evolution. The modern authors of The Bell Curve would have
614 American Journal of Economics and Sociology

learned a lot had they studied Wallace. Wallace struck at the roots of an-
cient British aristocracy—a heady but hazardous move. Gilbert and Sullivan
could do it through comedy and win a knighthood, at least for the musician
of the pair; but Wallace was deadly serious and impossible to misunder-
stand. As a result, he met with traducement and loss of name.

Wallace held that man’s mind overrode the action of natural selection
on his body. The mind understood and controlled natural forces. Without
inheritance of land, said Wallace, natural selection would be based more
on individual merit. Universal education would delay marriage; social re-
form would lower male death rates. Female choice of mates would then
take over natural selection, and replace Malthusian frightfulness as Nature’s
plan to improve the race. This wonderful yet awful truth was perhaps the
crowning blow to male illusions, and the traditional British primacy of “the
eldest son.” George Bernard Shaw put it on stage (Man and Superman)
and preached through comedy—who could say if tongue was in cheek? —
but Wallace was deadly serious. It was a bitter pill for male pride and self-
confidence in courtship. Wallace evoked some spite, although he was only
the messenger who brought the news to others of his gender.

Wallace’s view of land reform was obviously kindred in spirit to Henry
George’s Progress and Poverty (1879). Wallace had less regard than George
did for the free market, but both saw mankind as needing land, and saw
social organization as interwoven with the relation of men to land. Charles
Stewart Parnell brought them together: they both disapproved of his tem-
porizing in Ireland. Both submerged methodological differences to further
their common concept. Wallace used his Land Nationalization Society to
give George a platform when George toured Britain.

Wallace modestly played second fiddle to George, the spellbinding or-
ator, but it was possibly repressed jealousy that made him cast George as
simply a theorist who confirmed Wallace’s inductive argument. It was and
is a small matter, but perhaps for once Wallace, a man of noblest character,
was unfair. Even a saint may lapse. George was not “just” a theorist. He
had been a journalist; his first book, Our Land and Land Policy (1871),
was based on original investigative reporting of high quality, and as such
is still praised by historians.

In Britain, for many years, George’s Single Tax and Wallace’s Land Na-
tionalization were closely linked and identified. To Liberal Prime Minister
Herbert Asquith, a friend, they were two arms of a pincers. “Tax or Buy”
Alfred Russel Wallace on Land 615
was Asquith’s slogan. If valuation was too low, Buy! If too high, Tax! Like
Wallace, he was deadly serious.

In later years Wallace became more sympathetic to socialism, while
George moved the other way. Still, Wallace selflessly continued to support
George’s Single Tax movement which, in spite of George’s death in 1897,
dominated land reform efforts in Britain from 1895 to 1914, and even be-
yond. But British land reform, when it finally came in the Town and Coun-
try Planning Act (1947), evinced more Wallace than George. George would
not have owned it; his followers condemned it. Chances are that Wallace
would not have liked it, either. Like George, he was looking for something
much more sweeping and egalitarian and, in his own Shavian sense,
eugenic.

Wallace as both a natural scientist and a social thinker is enjoying a
revival today (Fichman, 1981, Clements , 1983), and deservedly so. Wallace
showed one can be a social Darwinist without being schrechlich like Dr.
Strangelove. His specific ideas about land reform were timely, well-consid-
ered in grand concept, and well thought out in practical details. He treated
his adversaries with courtesy and respect. He pursued his humanitarian
goals with a selflessness and sincerity all too rare in his times and, alas,
in Ours.

References

Bannister, R.C. 1979. Social Darwinism. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Clements, H. 1983. Alfred Russel Wallace, Biologist and Social Reformer. London: Hutch-
mnson.

Durant, John R. 1979. “Scientific Naturalism and Social Reform in the Thought of Alfred
Russel Wallace.” British Journal for the History of Science 12:31-58.

Fichman, M. 1981. Alfred Russel Wallace. Boston: Twayne Publishers.

Gaffney, Mason. 1987. “Alfred Russel Wallace.” In Eatwell, John; Peter Newman, and
Murray Milgate (eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Political Economy. London:
The Macmillan Press, Ltd.

Lawrence, E.P. 1957. Henry George in the British Isles. E. Lansing, Michigan: The Michigan
State University Press.

Wallace, A.R. 1869. The Malay Archipelago. 2 vols. London: Macmillan and Co.

———- 1876. The Geographical Distribution of Animals.

———- 1882. Land Nationalization. London: Swan Sonnenschein and Co., Lim.

——- 1905. My Life: A Record of Events and Opinions. 2 vols. London: Chapman and
Hall, Ltd.
