A . Lhe |
merican Journa @)
and
Vol. 67 January 2008 No. 1
Editor’s Introduction... 0. ee eee es Wii
IDEOLOGY AND POLITICAL PARTIES
Henry George’s Political Critics—Michael Hudson ...............1
GEORGE’S IDEAS IN DEBATE
Henry George, Emile de Laveleye, and the Issue of Peasant
Proprietorship—jerome F. Heavey ......0000000 00000 AT
Frank H. Knight's Criticism of Henry George—Koss B. Emmett ..... 61
SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY
Apprehending the Social Philosophy of Henry George—
Charles R. McCann, Jr. oo ee es OF
CONCEPTUAL DEBATES REGARDING LAND AND RENT
The Marginalists Who Confronted Land—Fred E. Foldvary ....... . 89
Keeping Land in Capital Theory: Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell,
and George—Mason Gaffney... 0.0.0 eee eee. 119
COMMUNICATIONS
Comment—Mark Perlman .. 0.000 ee 143
Keeping Land in Capital Theory
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George
By MASON GAFENEY*
Apsrract. Most economists today live in a two-factor world: There is
just labor and capital. Land, so central to classical political economy,
has been swallowed into capital and “disappeared.” This paper
surveys some of the better historical treatments of land and capital,
their interrelations, and how they support modern Georgists and
Greens who want land to reappear.
I
Introduction

David Ricardo had a theory of land rent, of course, plus a practical
understanding of compound interest and the relationship of capital to
labor. He wove these together in his theory of value. He saw how the
flow of investing into creating jobs and incomes led to higher employ-
ment; he was concerned that excessive conversion of working capital
into fixed capital would reduce that vital flow. This concern would
resurface with Mill, Jevons, the Austrians, Wicksell, and possibly—
indirectly—in Keynes.

Martin Faustmann showed how to convert irregular pulses of cost
and revenue, as in forestry, into the level annual equivalent, to define
and find the regular flow of site rent. He made this a performance
standard to maximize. In the process he showed how to find the
optimal time to harvest and replace forests. As an important byprod-
uct, his formula shows that rents vary inversely with interest rates, and
this effect tempers the effect of interest rates on financial maturity. An

*The author is Professor of Economics at the University of California, Riverside.

This paper was originally written for the annual meeting of the History of Economics
Society CHES), Grinnell College, June 25, 2006. The writer thanks Robert Dimand for
generous references to the literature; Mary M. Cleveland for editorial advice; and
Marianne Johnson for insightful suggestions about integrating the materials.

American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 67, No, 1 Qanuary, 2008).
© 2008 American Journal of Economics and Sociology, Inc.
120 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

even more important byproduct (quantitatively) is to adapt Faustmann
to time the salvaging of sites under old buildings by clearing and
renewing the sites.

He showed how to convert the infinite flow of such rents into a
present value, or discounted cash flow (DCF). His site value measure
combines the DCF of generation 1 with the reuse value of a site,
providing a mathematical basis for George’s later observations on the
damage done by land speculation. There was a flurry of interest in
reviving Faustmann from about 1957-1976. Economists now neglect
his work again; some industrial foresters may be subverting it for
wrong ends.

Bohm-Bawerk and other Austrians revived Ricardo’s concept of
working capital versus fixed capital, using other terminology while still
crediting Ricardo’s priority. J. B. Clark and Frank Knight expurgated the
Austrian idea of a “period of production” because it would up-end
Clark/Knight’s conflation of land and capital. Knight’s Chicago School
dominates academe today, while Austrians survive only in odd corners.

Wicksell improved on BOhm-Bawerk in three ways. He “normal-
ized” the model of tree growth, showing how Austrian capital inten-
sity works as a relation of coexistence (at any moment of time), not
just as a relation of sequence. Second, he restated the misunder-
stood and maligned “wages-fund” theory as a “wages-flow” theory,
a basis for reviving Ricardo’s concern that converting working
capital to fixed capital would disemploy labor. Third, he insisted
that the wages-flow employs land as well as labor—a finding
implicit in Faustmann, also.

Henry George divided land price into two parts: DCF from the
current use, plus the DCF from all future generations of use. He
observed that the value derived from the later generations, discounted
to the present, often keeps land from its highest and best use today
because of speculation. This effect, immanent in all land markets,
makes landowners collectively act like a universal cartel, pushing
labor and capital to lands of lower quality, depressing wage and
interest rates.

The policy implications are that George’s proposed policy of focus-
ing taxes on land value, and relieving commerce, industry, labor, and
capital from taxation, would enhance human welfare in many ways.
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 121
Il
How Ricardo’s Theory of Value Includes Land and Capital

Ricarpo ([1817] 1963) opens his Principles by noting that “the value of
(some commodities) is determined by their scarcity alone,” and
exceeds the value of labor embodied in them ([1817] 1963: 5). One
example he offers is “grapes grown on a particular soil, of which there
is a very limited quantity.” That is, a wine’s ferroir adds to its value.
On page 7 he generalizes that the value of a commodity is enhanced
by the “additional quantity of labor which the cultivation of inferior
land requires.” That is, its the labor required on marginal land that
equals value. On better land it takes less labor to produce the same
value, so rent enters into value (whether as cause or effect we need
not settle here). It is misleading to call that a “labor theory of value,”
as some do. One need only read Ricardo with reasonable sympathy to
see that his value theory is quite sophisticated and comprehensive. He
assumes, perhaps too sanguinely, that his readers will see the
extended implications of matters he covers only tersely.

As to capital, Sections IV and V of Chapter 1, “On Value,” are all
about the incorporation of imputed interest into value:

Value... varies with the unequal durability of capital, and by the unequal

rapidity with which it is returned to its employer. ({1817] 1963: 21)

In Chapter 31, “On Machinery,” Ricardo picks up these ideas again to
show how a reallocation of capital from working capital to fixed
capital may disemploy labor. Some later commentators have alleged
that Ricardo didn’t really mean it, or was aberrant when he wrote it.
Yet, it follows from his analysis in Chapter 1, Sections IV and V.
Ricardo does not mention Ludd, and he carefully avoids endorsing
smashing of machinery.

It is common to interpret Jevons as anti-Ricardian. This may be a
case of Jevons’s protesting too much, in his introduction, to differen-
tiate his product from Ricardo’s. It may also be a case of one critic
copying from another who copied from another, and so on, for if we
read Jevons himself, he writes that his views “on this subject are in
fundamental agreement with those adopted by Ricardo; (which they
are)... (as opposed to) some later economists” (1957: 222). He then
122 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
replicates Ricardo’s points as cited above (‘Theory of Capital,” Ch. 7,
esp. 222-245).

Austrian economists picked up on Ricardo’s basic idea, and gave
him credit by describing their finding as “Ricardo effect.” They
invented their own terminology, writing of “higher and lower orders
of capital.” Their treatment of land is somewhat negligent and inci-
dental; yet their “period of production” idea implies a sharp dis-
tinction between capital, which has one, and land, which does not.
It was for this underlying reason, according to Stigler, that J. B.
Clark and Frank Knight feuded so long and intransigently against
Austrians BOhm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Hayek, Fritz Machlup, and
others (Stigler 1941: 278). Clark and Knight aimed to wipe out any
bright line, or any line at all, between land and capital. If libertari-
anism and anti-Marxism were the dominant issues, Chicagoans and
Austrians would merge in mutual admiration and support. Instead,
rampant Chicagoans let Austrians survive mainly on the margins of
the profession.

TH
Martin Faustmann and Other Forest Economists

MarTIN FAUSTMANN was a German forest economist, writing in 1849,
who undertook to find the annual value of a forest site yielding a
periodic future stream of revenues. The aim was to find the “highest
and best use” (as we say today) of the site; to make commensurable
different uses with different yields over different time periods and with
different costs. He called this measure Bodenrente (ground rent).
Anglophonic foresters call it “soil rent,” but soil per se is only one of
several components that make forest sites yield rent: rain, tempera-
ture, slope, hours and angle of sunshine, and access to markets are as
or more important. I will denote it by “B,” for Bodenrente, and
Anglicize it as ground rent or site rent. (See Table 1.)

Faustmann began with the planting cost (P) of a tree at time zero.
He compounded this forward to the time (7) of harvest, using a
market rate of interest (4). Compounding P makes it commensurable
with the net value of the harvest at time 7 (5, for stumpage, which is
the sale value less the cost of harvest). Finally, he annualized (or
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 123
Table 1
n Harvest ime
i Interest rate
SFF Sinking fund factor
P Planting cost
S Stumpage (net sale value)
NS Net stumpage = —Pe" + S
B Ground rent
“levelized,” as some prefer to say) this value by multiplying it times the
sinking fund factor (SFF). Algebraically, we now have:
SEF = i/[e” -1] (1)
B=[—Pe” +S]x SFF (2)

Note that we now have labor, capital, and land compressed into one
expression, and maximizing this expression is a performance stan-
dard, that is, the highest and best use of land subject to market wage
rates (included in P and subtracted from S) and a market interest rate
(found in i# and the SFF).

Note also that the SFF accumulates the rent of the forest site, year
by year with interest, into the value of the final product, 5. This is a
point on which the great Knut Wicksell insisted, but that most other
economists have omitted. Even Wicksell never expressed it as com-
pactly or correctly as Faustmann in Equation (2). Ohlin hit on it in
1921, but never developed it, and apparently never checked the
forestry texts to credit Faustmann’s finding of 72 years earlier.

To simplify the notation, I will now consolidate the items in the
brackets into one, calling it net stumpage, or NS. Note, however,
that these items may include a lot more than the P value [| am
making invisible. There may be any number of intermediate costs
and revenues at times other than time zero and time , the ones
shown explicitly. Just compound each item forward to year , using
the appropriate number of years in each case. That makes them
124 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
commensurable so you may add (or subtract) them together. Fur-
thermore, these intermediate revenues may be falling, rather than
rising to a climax as in the forestry case. Thus, the formula can be
adapted to apply to factories, office buildings, milk cows, or any-
thing. The idea is to consolidate all intermediate values at one point
in time, #, and then levelize them into Bodenrente. Now we have:
B= NS x SFF @)

This levelized Bodenrente applies to years zero to n. To capitalize the
rent in perpetuity, divide Equation (3) by 7. Faustmann called this the
“Site Expectation Value” (Bodenerwartungswerte). (In fact, that is how
he originally derived his formula, which one may derive in several
ways.) Dividing by icancels the numerator of Equation (1), so we have:

Site value = NS/[e” — 1] (4)

The pesky little “-1” in the brackets in the denominator of Equa-
tion (4) makes the difference between the discounted cash flow (DCF)
of one generation of land use, and the DCF of infinite repeating
generations of land use.

Foresters have preserved Faustmann’s forrnula in a few texts, but
have not taken kindly to it. That is because it contains compound
interest, which most foresters (not all) wish would go away. They
dislike it because timber culture is so capital-intensive that it needs a
low rate of interest to justify itself in competition with rival uses of
land and capital—and foresters are in the business of justifying timber
culture. Instead, they generally prefer another performance standard
that Germans call Waldrente, and Anglophones call forest rent. This is
NS/n, where P is not compounded forward to year m but just sub-
tracted from S as though they were simultaneous (so NS =—P+ 8).
This, of course, results in higher values of forest rent.

We will soon see that this forest rent is the same as Faustmann’s
ground rent where a zero interest rate is applied. I have seen no
evidence that foresters derived it that way, or understand the relation-
ship, although surely some do. Many of them, however, disparage
Faustmann’s result as coming from putting mathematical or green-
eyeshade values, which they scorn, above forest values, which many
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 125
embrace rather too romantically. Let us not scoff, for they are sensitive
to collateral forest values that one-dimensional financial “rationality”
easily neglects. Rather, let us see what economists can learn from this.

Above all, let us not think foresters put no value on time, just
because they use a zero rate of interest. They are not maximizing NS,
but NS/n, that is NS per year. NS per acre per year is site rent, once
they have dismissed compound interest. In practice the forest man-
agement regime that maximizes NS/n is sometimes fairly close to the
one that maximizes Faustmann’s site rent, so that rough-and-ready
foresters have set aside the differences as nitpicking. This is anti-
intellectual and caters to innumeracy, and yet it contains an important
lesson for economists. This is, when interest rates are low, rent rises,
and stands in for interest as a cost of time. We return to this below.

Very few have been found who anticipated Faustmann. Discussions
are found in Samuelson (1976), Scorgi and Kennedy (1996), Gane
(1968), Ince (1999), Brazee (2001), Lofgren (1983), and others. Ohlin
discovered the principle, apparently independently, in 1921, 72 years
after Faustmann, but never developed it or discovered it was already
in the forestry literature. Other good discussions are in Bentley and
Teeguarden (1965), Pearse (1967), Scott (1987), Ellerman (2004), and
several works of David Klemperer (e.g., 1996, 2001).

A. Capital Distinct from Land
Note how Faustmann’s reasoning distinguishes clearly between capital
and land. Ever since J. B. Clark, neoclassical economists have con-
flated capital with land, denying the classical tripartite division of
factors into land, labor, and capital. Yet, felling, trimming and bucking
trunks, and hauling away logs separates a tree from its former site so
visibly and materially it is hard to deny. It is true that the capital in the
tree includes stored-up site rent, with interest—that is inherent in the
SFF used in Faustmann’s formula. We will see later how Wicksell
handled this last point.

B. Two Sources of Site Value
Site value is seen to consist of two distinct parts. The first part derives
from the present use: Call it generation 1, or G;. Discount the NS from
126 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
G, to the present in the usual way. Denote site value as W (from
Werte). Add to that the DCF of all later generations, G2, as of time 1.
This is also W (assuming identical future cycles of planting and
growth). Discount it to the present. Now we have:

w =[NS+W]/e™ (5)

Solving for W, we have Equation (4) again:
Ww =Ns/[e” -1] (4, repeated)
Some will object, and rightly so, to the simplifying assumption that
future cycles exactly replicate the first one. The formulation in Equa-
tion (5) is useful when we want to adapt Faustmann to conditions
when the expected value of W at time m exceeds the value from
generation 1. Klemperer and Farkas (2001) have recently opened this
topic in Forest Science, and there is an interesting but short literature
on the impact of taxes on the “ripening” of suburban land into higher
uses. It is mnemonic to call W from generation 1 the “possessory”
value, and value from later generations the R value, where R stands for
resale, reuse, regeneration, renewal, or another “re”-word meaning a
new start on the old site. Some call it “speculative” value because the
uncertainty of specific forecasts rises with their futurity and novelty.
Anyone pursuing those threads may adapt Faustmann’s formulation
to untangle them. It waited on Henry George (q.v.) to pursue them
seriously. He was moved by observation and intuition, without benefit
of formal capital theory. We will see how theory can throw light on the
case that troubled George.
C. Site Kent Rises as Interest Rates Fall

This is a most important result, one that is flouted daily in the business
press, in academic literature, and in pleas to redistribute wealth and
income from rich to poor by lowering interest rates. In the two-factor
world of neoclassical economists, land is just another form of capital;
by implication, rents and interest rates must move in sympathy. This
has become the working assumption behind many public policies,
some introduced from the “left” and some from the “right,” but equally
mistaken.
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 127
Table 2
The SFF=7/ [e”- 1] (as a Percentage, Rounded) with
Different Values of the Interest Rate i and the Term 7
iN no 5 10 20 50
0.1 19.95 9.95 4.95 1.95
0.5 19.75 9.75 4.75 1,76
1 19.50 9.51 4.52 1.54
3 18.54 8.57 3.65 0.86
5 17.60 7.71 2.91 0.45
10 15.41 5.82 1.57 0.07
When interest rates rise, site rents fall. Equation (2) tells us there are
two reasons for this. The more obvious reason is that P, the initial
planting cost, is compounded forward to year n, using a market rate
of interest, before being subtracted from S (stumpage) in year 7.
The second reason is less obvious, but equally weighty and general:
The SFF is also a decreasing function of i. This is not obvious because ,
both the numerator and denominator of the SFF are increasing func-
tions of % Both approach zero as 7 approaches zero, so we cannot
demonstrate the point by the easy reductio ad extremum of letting 7
equal zero. Rather, we can tabulate values of the SFF to show how it
varies with i It approaches a limit of 1/7 as i 0. ] begin with very
low values of i, so the top row of Table 2 makes the point.! Note that
the values are rounded.
D. When to Terminate Investment Cycles
The best forest sites, the ones that are “warm, wet, and flat,” are where
timber grows fastest, and where succeeding crops may be replanted
soonest. Faustmann therefore focused on finding the optimal harvest
time, to maximize site rent. This turns out to be the year when the
value of timber’s current annual growth just covers the sum of interest
on the stumpage (5) and the site rent (B). (Gaffney 1957 covers the
interesting problem of simultaneously finding the highest and best
value of B while also using it to determine itself.)
128 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

From Table 2, when 2=50 and i=5 percent or more, the SFF is
negligible compared with interest on S. Practical foresters often just
ignore it. However, when #2=10 and i=5 percent, the SFF is 8
percent, and plays a larger role than / in determining harvest dates. A
great deal of timber now matures in less than 20 years, especially in
the southeastern United States, where sites are “warm, wet, and flat,”
and the Southern yellow pine thrives.

When the interest rate falls, easing the pressure to harvest mature
timber, site rent rises, partially offsetting and tempering the first effect.
So the net effect of interest rates on harvest times is much weaker than
the simpler analysis, still found in textbooks, would indicate.

But replacement analysis concerns much more than timber. The
greater practical role of site rent is in determining when to clear aged
buildings and renew the site. Here there is no salvage value, but only
a weak and dying cash flow or service flow. Ratcliff (1949) and
Gaffney (19604, 1969) have addressed this case.

Here is where site rent, B, is essential to the decision of timing. The
salvage value of a decrepit, obsolete building is close enough to zero
that we may ignore it. Unlike mature timber, it has no growth rate, so
we cannot use the simple old formula that capital is mature when its
growth rate equals the interest rate. If we were to use that formula for
timber and generalize from it, we would be left with no reason at all
to clear and renew sites with old buildings.

The economic reason to tear down old buildings is to salvage
their sites for future use, and begin realizing the potential rent. To
calculate that rent, we pencil out the capital cost of rebuilding, the
timing and value of future cash flows, and their likely duration.
Then we “levelize” those values, just as Faustmann did for timber
(Equations (2) and (3)).

In this case it is customary and intuitive to make a procedural
change from Faustmann. Instead of compounding all values forward
ta the terminal year, », discount all future values to time zero, add
them up, and subtract the initial capital cost, P. Then levelize them
and convert them into the annual rent by applying the installment plan
factor (IPF), which is the same as the SFF multiplied by e”. Thus the
result is identical with compounding each value forward to year 1,
and applying the SFF. I bring it up here because it corresponds more
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 129
closely with the way builders see the matter, just as Faustmann
corresponds with how foresters see it.

Recent neoclassical theorists have done little with the question of
when it is economical to salvage and renew urban sites. It is a practical
and theoretical question of high and growing importance. I can only
surmise that this neglect results from recent neoclassical training that
suppresses thoughts that entail distinguishing land values from build-
ing values. This training, in which moderns are heavily invested, tells
them there are only two factors: labor and capital.

Notice, now, how the rate of interest affects site rent. Higher interest
rates mean lower site rents. Thus, instead of speeding the end of life of
old capital, higher interest rates retard it, by lowering site rents, which
are here the only cost of time, the only economic force prompting
clearance and renewal. This makes sense in its own right; a builder
faced with higher interest rates will perceive their force on his decision
in his own way. But if economic theory is to help him, or predict what
he will do, it needs the help of something like Faustmann’s formula.

E. The Flurry of Interest in Faustmann, ¢. 1957-1975

The revival of Faustmann’s work attracted a good deal of interest after
1957. Jack Hirshleifer circulated it among the economic “elite,” while
many forest economists saw it as a useful tool. Samuelson endorsed it.
Among economists this interest died out after a while. Both Hirshleifer
(1970) and his cotleagues Alchian and Allen later published works in
which they regressed to the old winery example where wine is
immature so long as its value is growing faster than the interest
rate—with never a mention of site rent. Samuelson omitted it when
holding up his end of the Cambridge controversy, where it might have
helped his case.’ I can only surmise that this regression resulted from
their discomfort, as neoclassical economists, with distinguishing land
from capital.

The support of industrial foresters was something of a Faustman-
nian bargain. Industry economists seized on Faustmann to put a gloss
of rationale on rapid cutting, even abusive cutting, such as clearing
steep slopes, polluting streams and fisheries, roading erosively, endan-
gering rare species, and so on. They attacked the U.S. Forest Service,
130 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

using Resources for the Future, Inc. (R.F.F.) as a vehicle. Their influ-
ence on R.FF, is manifest in the list of major contributors, listed in
every annual report, that kept that organization afloat after the Ford
Foundation withdrew its support after 1971. This writer, an R.F-F.
associate rescarching the undertaxation of forests and forest land, was
blandished and courted by timber lobbyists, declined, and soon found
it better to accept work elsewhere. Trying to publish such findings in
academic journals has been a nightmare: Industry tentacles reach deep
into the clerisy.

U.S. schools of forestry have become adjuncts of the industry, as
their deans troll for grants and avoid offense. They influence many
scholarly journals. A leading professor of forestry threatened to retali-
ate professionally if I wrote that timber owners in 1944 secured
preferential capital-gains tax treatment, while troops overseas were
receiving 1040 tax forms at mail-call—a soldiers meager pay is
“ordinary” income. A current incident illustrates the culture of com-
plaisance with industry demands. An apolitical graduate student in the
School of Forestry at Corvallis, Daniel Donato, found evidence that
certain salvage logging practices retard regeneration. This finding
troubled industry officers and allied state legislators. These admon-
ished the dean, writing in the familiar, insolent tone a king might use
with his jester. The dean and some senior professors joined an effort
to stop Science from publishing the findings (Boxall and Wilson 2006).

IV
Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk and Other Austrians
Boum-Bawerk, as is well known, published a weighty tome on capital
theory, dueled over it with J. B. Clark, and helped found the Austrian
School of economics. He dealt with financial maturity of timber, and
discounted cash flow, and other basic elements of finance. In debating
Clark, insofar as one can follow their involuted arguments, Bohm-
Bawerk insisted that capital has a “period of production,” and stated
or implied that land has none—a solecism to Clark. George Stigler,
echoing Clark and Knight, objects to the Austrian School concept of a
“period of production” because it presumes a difference between
capital, which has one, and land, which does not (Stigler 1941: 278).
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 131

There is no clue that B6hm-Bawerk ever heard of Faustmann, or
consulted the vigorous and extensive German literature on forest
economics. Like Alchian and Allen later, Bohm-Bawerk simply tells us
that timber is immature as long as its value is growing faster than the
interest rate. Wicksell archly expressed an expository problem that also
stands between B6hm-Bawerk and most readers: “he loves to pile up
difficulties in order that he may remove them later” (Gaffney 1983: 201).

Vv
Knut Wicksell
WickseLt ([1893] 1954) MoDEsTLY paints himself as a “Swedish Austrian,”
a disciple of Béhm-Bawerk. He then proceeds to improve on the
master.

One great contribution is his normalizing BOhm-Bawerk’s model
of growth over time, a relation of sequence, into the corresponding
relation of coexistence. His model uses maturing wine as the example,
and economists often call it the “grape-juice model” (Wicksell [1901]
1934: 172-176), but it applies to all growing capital like trees. Here he
deftly converts B6hm-Bawerk’s model of an even-aged forest into the
corresponding normalized or “going-concern” forest, where ages are
staggered so there is at any time one tree of every age. The whole life
span of a single tree is then represented simultaneously by a cross-
section of the normalized forest.

Wicksell then shows that the higher capital content of a longer-lived
tree (the accumulated interest over time), which Bohm-Bawerk con-
ceives in the time dimension, makes the normalized forest equally
capital-intensive at every moment in time. A mathematician might sniff
that he merely inverted the order of integration. Perhaps that is all he
did mathematically and conceptually, but he did it in an economic
model, while others were struggling unsuccessfully to fit Bohm-
Bawerk’s ideas into their neoclassical models from which time had
been largely banished—and rejecting or isolating the ideas when they
could not fit them into their static, Clarkian models. From 1870-1920,
“much of the economics was ...an economic theory of acapitalistic
production. Considerations of capital theory proper... simply disap-
pear from the picture” (Robbins 1934: xiv).>
132 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Wicksell immediately used his normalized model to demonstrate
how a lower interest rate makes for a more capital-intensive economy,
as trees (or wines) are replaced more slowly, so there is more timber
outstanding at any given time, while the labor of planting and har-
vesting remains constant. Conversely, a lower wage rate leads to
shorter cycles so that more labor is employed per unit of capital.
(Lower taxes on labor would have the same effect.) Factor proportions
will adjust to match any given supply of capital with any given supply
of labor.

Thus, Wicksell used BOhm-Bawerk to complete Ricardo’s and J. S.
Mill's and Jevons’s cruder demonstrations that factor proportions are
malleable, and tend to an optimal! equilibrium with full employment of
labor and capital, both. Adam Smith’s invisible hand had dealt mainly
with commodities, Ricardo and Mill extended the idea to comprehend
factor proportions as well. Marshall regressed in this respect toward
Smith when he developed supply and demand analysis, mainly with
respect to commodities with limited markets. The profession generally
has followed Marshall’s commodity-based model. Even Keynes,
dealing with aggregate supply and demand, limited demand by a
propensity to save (in excess of investing) that allegedly rose with
income. Keynes, while crediting Wicksell with some othe? inspira-
tions, paid no heed to Wicksell’s simple “grape juice” demonstration
of the variability of factor proportions. Keynesians for decades
brushed such questions aside as mere “structural” issues, unworthy of
their time. Latter-day “supply-siders” and “growth-men” continue to
shunt them aside, focusing on raising GNP with fixed factor propor-
tions as the single-minded goal of thought and policy.

Friedrich and Vera Lutz (1951) repeat Wicksell’s normalized model,
but then turn around and botch it, in an otherwise flawless book.
They use their own rather stilted terminology, from which four-
letter words like “land” and “site” are absent. They cite neither
Faustmann’s nor Wicksell’s previous work. Having first arrived at
Faustmann’s solution with a single-aged stand of timber, they claim
the normalized model leads them back to a longer optimal rotation
period. In a word, they do this by including land in the single-aged
model, then omitting it from their normalized model. The details are
in Gaffney (1957).
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 133

Wicksell also contributed a correction and revival of the misappre-
hended “wages-fund” theory. He correctly reformulated it as the
“wages-flow” theory. It is the flow of capital into investing, not a fixed
fund of capital, that hires workers and creates incomes, Wicksell
showed how the flow/fund ratio rises when capital turns over faster,
as in the grape-juice model, so a fixed fund of capital can generate
more investing whenever a surplus of labor seeks jobs. Or, by slowing
its turnover, it can afford more investment opportunities when the
supply of capital is in surplus (Wicksell 1901: 193-194).

Thus, Wicksell laid the groundwork for a macro economics, and
policy measures derived therefrom, that would be based on real
turnover of real capital, and not just flows of spending money
(Gaffney 2003). Earl Rolph, in a stimulating but unpublished paper,
tried to show that Keynes’s Treatise on Money incorporated such
ideas—to which Rolph was cool. If Keynes did that then, he dropped
it from his General Theory that became the basis of standard macro
theory for years. Macro is the poorer for it. Wicksell’s turnover of real
capital is what could have bridged and still should bridge the chasm
between macro and micro, and save macro from the futility and
frustration of latter-day devices like the Phillips curve, growth theory
with fixed proportions, rational expectations, and Barro’s twist on the
Ricardian equivalence theorem.

A third Wicksell contribution was to incorporate land into his
capital theory. He insists in his wages-flow theory that the flow of
investing pays not just wages but site rent. This point was already
inherent in Faustmann’s use of the SFE to define rent, but there is no
evidence that Wicksell was any more aware of Faustmann than was
the Austrian, BOhm-Bawerk. Faustmann had never related his work to
any macro-economic idea like the wages-fund theory. Considering
that all were central Europeans who published in German, it was a
tueful isolation of related work into airtight compartments, to the
impoverishment of all.

A common way to dismiss Wicksell and B6hm-Bawerk is to allege
that their theories and models apply only to timber, and a limited
range of kinds of living and appreciating capital like timber and
wine. My colleague Karl Uhr (R.LP.), a lifelong student of and
leading authority on Wicksell, taught that. Hans Brems, a native
134 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Dane steeped in Wicksell, held a related opinion. Assets like timber
and wine are now generally called “point-input, point-output” assets
(PIPO), and treated, if treated at all, as a trivial, exceptional special
case.

This is a mathematical error. The PIPO case is the building block for
all capital theory, from which its other familiar formulae are derived
by summation. Discounted cash flow, sinking fund, compounded cash
flow, installment plan factors, capitalization in perpetuity, internal rate
of return... all can be derived, jointly or separately, as summations of
geometrical progressions of PIPO cases. What is true for the basic
element is likely to hold also for the summations. Above (Section
I.C), I pointed out how Faustmann’s formula, ostensibly dealing with
timber growth, can be adapted to deal with all capital assets, with any
time-patterns of inputs and outputs whatsoever.

To respond to the error of isolating the PIPO case, the writer has
published a set of models showing how to replicate Wicksell’s grape-
juice model with depreciating assets, or with a constant-valued asset
of finite lifespan (Gaffney 1976). The last, the “cow-sow model,” is the
easiest to grasp and requires little mathematics or capital theory. A
cow is assumed to yield a constant milk flow over 10 years, then
suddenly be slaughtered for the hide and meat, which are sold for
exactly the original cost of birthing and weaning. There is a herd of
cows whose ages are staggered. Cut the lifespan to five years, and the
ratio of cows (capital) to the costs of slaughter and birthing Gabor) is
halved. Let each cow require a fixed complement of land, and the
ratio of land to labor is likewise halved.

The “clean sock” model is even simpler, more homely and intuitive.
To have a clean pair of socks every morning, | can have one pair of
socks and wash them by hand every night. (Some can recall that
situation, as soldiers or students.) If 1 choose to save labor by washing
once a week, I will need seven pairs of socks, with added storage
space, a hamper, a washer, and so on, Baumol (1965) makes a similar
point, mutatis mutandis, with his cash flow model.

Perhaps Gaffney, like Faustmann, published in the wrong place at
the wrong time, for his findings went unnoticed by the macro econo-
mists of his day. Or perhaps Gaffney got it wrong: That is for others
to judge.
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 135
VI
Henry George

GEORGE ON CAPITAL THEORY is best forgotten. He is best known for his
observations on land ([1879] 1938). The gist of Progress and Poverty is
that land markets function badly, keeping the best lands from their
highest uses and creating an artificial scarcity. He likens this to a
universal cartel. George’s goal is to break the cartel, thus creating jobs,
raising wage rates, and raising production and living standards.

We find in Progress and Poverty three major reasons why land
markets (absent land-value taxation) perform badly. One is “land
speculation,” conceived as “holding for the rise” and, by strong
implication, as a “store of value” without regard to current use. A
second is the appetite of the rich for land as an item of consumption
for recreation, for amenity, and for show, as exemplified then by
English noblemen’s “deer parks,” and today by the vast manorial
holdings of rich Americans in once-rural counties, marina space for
their mega yachts, airspace for their private planes, urban land for
grounds around their mansions, trophy golf courses and polo ficlds,
hunting clubs, and so on. A third is that our Solons base taxes on using
and improving land, with hardly any on just holding land. The “excess
burden” of such taxation takes the form of underusing land. Gaffney
(2006) has undertaken to show this excess burden in terms of the
capital theory that George lacked.

George’s effort to formalize his capital theory is weak. He lacks
any mathematics of finance. He flays the wages-fund theory without
citing any advocate, or seeming to understand it. He attributes the
productivity of capital solely to living things like livestock. Then
other uses of capital, which he says are not productive, must pay
interest because of arbitrage. Let us forgive him these trespasses;
they are isolated from his major thesis. His powers of observation,
and his intuitions about land values, were sound and original,
and may be formalized in terms that would satisfy a Wicksell or a
Faustmann.

We can express his idea of land speculation in terms of Equa-
tion (3). Let B; be the land rent in current use until time n, Bo, for rent
in subsequent use. Multiply B, by the discounted cash flow
136 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Table 3
1/(é"— 1) as a Function of Interest Rates, 4, and Lifespans, 7
An 10 20 30
2% 451.67% 203.32% 121.64%
4% 203.32% 81.60% 43.10%
8% 81.60% 25.30% 9.98%
12% 43.10% 9.98% 2.81%
16% 25.30% 4.25% 0.83%
20% 15.65% 1.87% 0.25%
factor = (1 — &”)/i. Multiply Bs by 1/ie” to discount its value to time
zero. We can write present value Was the sum of two terms:
W =B(1-e”)/i+ B,/ie” (6)

The ratio of the second to the first term is B2/B, * 1/Ce”— 1).

This obviously falls as i and 7 increase. Table 3 shows 1/Ce’” — 1) as
a function of tand n. If we look at the column under n= 20 years, a
person with a discount rate of 2 percent values Bz over By approxi-
mately 100 times as much as does a person with a discount rate of 20
percent!

Now make Bz >> Bi. The value of Wis dominated by Bo.

Enter the phenomenon we know today as “capital market failure.”
Those with good collateral obtain cheaper credit, or impute a lower
discount rate, than do those without collateral—regardless of the
quality of a proposed investment.

To simplify, we are not far off the mark to postulate that a struggling
startup entrepreneur—the kind that gives capitalism its dynamic—can
place no value at all on the second term, B,/ie”. This entrepreneur is
desperately seeking capital, paying high interest rates that devalue
later uses so much that he ignores them. At the other extreme, a
passive investor seeking a store of value that keeps with no care might
place little value on the first term, B\ — &”)/i, and, applying his low
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 137
discount rate, place a high value on the second term. The startup
entrepreneur, financed with costly venture capital, would view the
passive investor as a “dog-in-the-manger,” as George did. The passive
investor would view the newcomer as a nuisance and interloper
today, and a possible meal ticket for tomorrow. Cleveland (1984) has
developed this theme at length.

W grows rapidly as time passes and the present approaches 7.
where B» is to displace By. This annual increment may be high
enough to warrant holding the land for its appreciation alone. Of
course, one could also use it at the same time, and some do; but
others hold more land than they have time to bother using, or using
well or fully.

As an example, my family and I have lived on the same low hill
since 1976, a quarter-mile from the city’s major shopping “galleria” and
its many satellites, two major interchanges, a railway station, a large
hospital, and dozens of little shops and services, Eight of the neigh-
boring plots have not been used during that 30-year period, while
new building proceeds in leaps and bounds dozens of miles further
out. There are also many householders whose yards and curtilages
include an extra lot or two for future resale. Each owner has his or her
own story and reasons, often of a “passive-aggressive” hue, but
meantime the lands have about octupled in value, doubling every 10
years, for an annual return of 7.2 percent. That is more than one can
make in the bank, and it is free of any tax on “ordinary” income, and
may never be taxed at all.

To accommodate the inchoate dreams of people like my neighbor-
ing landowners, young people getting started are priced out of the
land market for homes and businesses. The New York Times of June
13, 2007 brings the news:

From 1990 to 2004, the number of 25- to 34-year-old residents in the 52

counties north of Rockland and Putnam declined by more than 25 percent.

In 13 counties that include cities like Buffalo, Syracuse, and Binghamton,

the population of young adults fell by more than 30 percent. In Tioga

County, part of Appalachia in New York’s Southern ‘lier, 42 percent fewer

young adults were counted in 2004 than in 1990.

New York pays to educate them by taxing sales and incomes, mostly
from work; then they take their bodies, filled with human capital and
138 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology
the spirit of enterprise, to greener pastures. This is a recipe for
decadence and desuetude in a once-vibrant region.

The market may be topping out—who can be sure?—but 30 years
at 7.2 percent, tax-deferred or tax-free, has been a good run. The real
growth rate is less than the nominal rate, due to inflation, but real
interest rates are also lower than nominal rates, for the same reason,
and fully taxable besides. Purists may say the owners would maximize
their wealth by using the land as it appreciates, but they don’t, which
speaks volumes. Economists need to explain what they observe, not
just what their ideology says might or should be. It was just such an
observation in the hills above Oakland that pricked Henry George,
originally an investigative reporter and editor, to write Progress and
Poverty.

Gale Johnson (1950) and Stephen Cheung (1969) have explained
the neglect of land in terms of share tenancy. A share tenant will take
as much land as the landlord will allow because there is no fixed cost
of taking more. Sharecropping creates an incentive structure that
motivates the cropper to substitute land for labor (as much as the
landowner allows) until the marginal product of land is zero. Our tax
system, except for the property tax on land, operates something like
sharecropping. We do not pay a tax for the land we hold, but only for
the use we make of it: We “share the crop” with the fisc. The analogy
needs modifying because we pay to buy land, and forego gain by
holding it, unlike the share tenant. Yet at the same time we accrue gain
“in our sleep,” as Mill said, by just holding it. The market as a whole
operates against that fiscal background, which bids us substitute land
for capital and labor.

Vil
Conclusion
RICARDO, FAUSIMANN, BOhm-Bawerk and other Austrians, and Wicksell
all contributed mightily to capital theory. Ricardo, Faustmann,
Wicksell, and Henry George also contributed to our understanding of
land values and rent. George, the least mathematical but the most
observant of the lot, pointed up major flaws in land markets, exacer-
bated by flaws in tax policy. We can use mathematics and insights
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 139
from the others to expound more fully what George merely observed,
and help evaluate his proposals to raise wage rates, and marginal
returns on investing, by perfecting land markets.

Notes

1. Do not despair of evaluating a ratio that approaches 0/0. One of the
Bernoullis solved this long ago, and named the solution for a wealthy patron,
so it appears in many calculus texts as “L’H6pital’s Rule.”

2. My esteemed colleague Mary M. Cleveland thinks not, and I have yet to
prove her wrong.

3. Tt was Auguste Comte who wrote that all science consists of relations
either of coexistence or sequence. Clark confined neoclassical economics into
a box that shut out relations of sequence. Wicksell’s model neatly combines
both kinds of relations.

References

Baumol, William. (1965). Economic Theory and Operations Analysis. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Co.

Bentley, William, and Dennis Teeguarden. (1965). “Financial Maturity: A
Theoretical Review.” Forest Science 2(March): 76-87.

Boxall, Bettina, and Janet Wilson. (2006). “A Student’s Forest Paper Sparks
One Hot Debate.” 7.4. Times, June 11: Al+.

Brazee, R. J. (2001). “The Faustmann Formula: Fundamental to Forest
Economics 150 Years After Publication.” Forest Science 47(4): 441-
442,

Cheung, S. N. S. (1969). The Theory of Share Tenancy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Cleveland, Mary M. (1984). “Differences Between Large and Small, Given
Appreciating and Depreciating Capital, and Variations in Land Quality.”
In: “Consequences and Causes of Unequal Distribution of Wealth.” PhD
diss., U.C. Berkeley.

Ellerman, David. (2004). “Series-Parallel Duality and the Faustmann-Ohlin-
Gaffney Problem.” Unpublished ms.

Faustmann, Martin. (1849). “Berechnung des Werthes welchen Waldboden-
... fur die Waldwirtschaft besitzen.” Allgemeine Forst und Jagd-Zeitung
25: 441-455. Rpt in M. Gane, Ed. (1968) Martin Faustmann and the
Evolution of Discounted Cash Flow. Trans. W. Lennard. Institute Paper 42.
Oxford, UK: Commonwealth Forestry Institute.

Gaffney, Mason. (1957). Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber and Otber
Assets. Agricultural Information Series 62. Raleigh: North Carolina State
College.
140 The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

——. (1964). “Property Taxes and the Frequency of Urban Renewal.” Pro-
ceedings. NTA, 57th Annual Conference, Pittsburgh, PA.

——.. (1969). “Land Planning and the Property Tax.” Journal of the American
Institute of Planners May: 178-183.

——. (1976). “Toward Full Employment with Limited Land and Capital.” In;
Property Taxation, Land Use and Public Policy. Ed. Arthur Lynn, Jr.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

——. (1983). “Tax Reporting and the Commerce Clause.” In: Fiscal Federalism
and the Taxation of Natural Resources. Eds: Charles McLure and Peter
Mieszkowski (pp. 199-203). Lexington: Lexington Books.

——. (2003). “Laxes, Capitat and Jobs.” Geophilos 3(1): 62-75.

——.. (2006). “A Simple Measure of Tax Bias.” American Journal of Economics
and Sociology 65(3): 433-449.

Gane, Michael, Ed. (1968). Martin Faustmann and the Evolution of Dis-
counted Cash Flow. Institute Paper 42. Oxford, UK: Commonwealth
Forestry Institute.

George, Henry. ({1879] 1938). Progress and Poverty. New York: Modern
Library.

Hirshleifer, Jack (1970). investment, Interest, and Capital. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Ince, Peter J. (1999). “Faustmann and the Forestry Tradition.” Proceedings of
the International Symposium. Baton Rouge School of Forestry, Wildlife
and Fisheries, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center.

Jevons, William Stanley. ([1882] 1957). The Theory of Political Economy. New
York: Kelley and Millman.

Johnson, Gale. (1950). “Resource Allocation Under Share Contract.” Journal of
Political Economy 58(April): 111-123.

Klemperer, David. (1996). Forest Resource Economics and Finance. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Klemperer, David, and Daniel B. Farkas. (2001). “Impacts on Economically
Optimal Timber Rotations When Future Land Use Changes.” Forest
Science 47(4): 520-525,

Lofgren, Karl. (1983). “The Faustmann-Ohlin Theorem.” History of Political
Economy 15(2): 261-264.

Lutz, Friedrich, and Vera Lutz. (1951). Theory of Investment of the Firm.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

Ohlin, Bertil. (1921), “Till Fragen om skogarnas omloppstid.” In: Ekonomisk
Vidskrift, “Festschrift to Knut Wicksell.” Rpt. and trans. (1995) “Concerning
the Question of the Rotation Period in Forestry.” Journal of Forest
Economics 1: 89-114.

Pearse, Peter. (1967). “The Optimal Forest Rotation.” Forestry Chronicle
43(June): 178-195.

Ratcliff, Richard U. (1949). Urban Land Economics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ricardo, Faustmann, Wicksell, and George 141

Ricardo, David. ([1817] 1963). Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.
Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.

Robbins, Lionel. (1934). “Introduction.” In: Lectures on Political Economy.
Trans. E. Classen. New York: Macmillan Company.

Samuelson, Paul. (1976). “Economics of Forestry in an Evolving Society.”
Economic Inquiry 14: 466-492. Rpt. (1995) Journal of Forest Economics
10): 115 ff.

Scorgi, Michael, and John Kennedy. (1996). “Who Discovered the Faustmann
Condition?” HOPE 28(1): 77-80.

Scott, Anthony. (1987). “Martin Faustmann.” In: The New Palgrave. Ed. Eatwell
etal.

Stigler, George J. (1941). Production and Distribution Theories. New York:
Macmillan.

Wicksell, Knut. ([1893] 1954). Value, Capital and Rent. Trans. S. H. Frowein.
London: George Allen and Unwin.

——. (119011 1934). Lectures on Political Economy. Trans. E. Classen. New
York: Macmillan Company.
142
