                               Rent—seeking and Global Conflict, p.1
   /
                  RENT—SEEKING AND GLOBAL CONFLICT

                            Mason Gaffney

   Summary for UC seminar on Global Conflict and Cooperation

                      Laguna Beach, 26—27 Feb 88


    National governments originate historically to acquire, hold
and police land. Other functions are assumed later, but
sovereignty over land is always the first business. Private
parties hold land from the sovereign: every chain of title goes
back to a grantor who originally seized the land.

    When economists today speak of "rent—seeking" they usually are
thinking not of basic land rent, but in subtle and sophisticated
terms, looking at dribs and drabs of transfer rent derived from
contracting advantages. They develop abstract models for gaming
optimally with imperfect information, and so on. By emphasizing
the arcane while ignoring the basic they are in danger of matching
the proverbial expert who fine—tunes all the details and
elaborations as he forges on to the grand disaster.

    Indeed, we have had one such disaster. Viet Nam was viewed by
many as an economists' war, rationally planned and led by the best
and the brightest systems' analysts, exemplified by the brilliant,
energetic Secretary of Defense. One should not be surprised at the
post-Viet Nam decline of interest in applying modern economic
theory to questions of global conflict.

    We would be more useful to statesmen if we looked first at
rent—seeking in the grosser sense of "land-grabbing", where the
whole bundle is at stake. When William of Normandy conquered
England the prize was land rent, all of it. He and his retainers
dispossessed the local rent—collectors. It was simple, gross, and
basic, and much more consequential than the trivial rent—seeking
we model today. The bulk of the natives may have been affected
only marginally: they just paid Lord B instead of Lord A. But it
made all the difference to Lords B and A, the ones who made basic
decisions about global conflict and cooperation.

    Again, from the 17th century Europeans invaded North America,
dispossessed the natives and each other, until today we meet here,
overlooking beach and ocean, paying our daily rent for a little
slice of land which has been won and kept by a long chain of wars.

       The roof over our heads is different, it is the product of
                            Rent-seeking and Global Conflict, p.2

capital formation. Someone saved from income, and paid workers to
construct the building. Its present value is that less the obvious
depreciation and obsolescence, so it is rentable today mainly for
its appreciated site, to which therefore an economist or an
appraiser must impute most of the market value here.

    But the site never was nor could be the product of capital
formation. It pre—existed man, who could only acquire it by
taking. It is fair to say that throughout most of history that is
what warfare was about, seizing and holding and policing land.

    This is not to deny ancillary causes and issues of war, such
as disputing the pathway to Heaven, ethnic pride, paranoia,
acquisitive genes, and a leader's need to divert people from
domestic problems. Economists should certainly make it their
business to address the last, a major source of global conflict.

    Neither is this to deny that territorial expansion is often
self-defeating, economically. Many empires, probably most, cost
more than they return, a discovery that accounts for the
well—being of small nations like Sweden, Austria, Denmark, and The
Netherlands, which gained by abandoning destiny and empire. But we
would miss the point to bury particulars in aggregates. By
disaggregating benefits and costs we gain the key to
understanding. The whole nation loses, but certain parties gain,
and it is they who promote and sustain aggressive behavior.

    Economists conventionally bury this point when they submit
that "national defense is a public good".

    a) "Defense" is a loaded word which rationalizes as it
describes. "Military spending" is more neutral, and will be used
here. It is worth remembering that the German Schutz (as in
Schutz—Stffe1) and Wehr (as in Wehrmacht) both translate as
"defense". Lebensraum is a more forthright term, and explains much
more about Nazi aggressions.

    b) "Public good" says that all gain equally. But that is not
true even of pure defense proper. What is defended behind the
defense wall is land previously seized. The Lords and Barons have
much at stake; the serfs and vagrants very little. Rent is what is
being defended, along with, no doubt, traditional feelings of
machismo and some local folkways and mores.

    Wages, as well as the return for capital formation, ultimately
need little defense because they are economically functional. They
are paid for real service and sacrifices, and will command a
return in almost any viable system. Labor is also more migratory.
                            Rent—seeking and Global Conflict, p.3

"Fixed" capital also migrates economically as capital recovery
funds are reinvested elsewhere. Land, in contrast, does not
migrate among nations. Nations are defined as areas of land.

    But it is outside the defense wall of the nation proper that
rent-seeking is most dynamic and destabilizing. Military force
(often in tandem with finance) is used to project sovereignty into
foreign nations, and over no-man's—lands like the oceans, polar
regions, radio spectrum, and outer space.

    Offshore rent-seekers are of two general kinds.

    1. "Caciques". Cacique is a generic term for local cooperating
rulers from the native population. It is more neutral than
Quisling, and most caciques are more independent than he was.
Imperial metropolitan powers normally work through caciques.
Turnover among individual caciques is sometimes high, but they are
drawn from the matrix of the local landholding oligarchy which is
quite stable, often thanks to our support.

    We relieve the caciques of collecting and/or paying taxes for
their own military, which often double as domestic police as well.
The life of some caciques is risky, but the rewards to caciques
and local landholders are often very high. The Sultan of Brunei is
the richest man in the world; the extravagance of Ferdinand and
Imelda Marcos is legendary.

    Unit land values in Tokyo exceed those in New York and Chicago
by a factor of about 10. One reason (of several) for the
difference is that New York and Chicago pay taxes to defend Tokyo,
plus what the Japanese once called the Greater East Asia
Co-Prosperity Sphere. Roosevelt in 1941 stopped Japan at Viet Nam,
precipitating Pearl Harbor. But Eisenhower said in 1959 we must
defend Viet Nam to protect the Japanese resource base.

    2. Rent-seekers of the second kind are U.S. or allied
multinational interests, mostly corporations. The cacique is
expected to assign to them, or be complaisant in their
taking concessions and resources like minerals, transportation
routes, communications, bank charters, plantations, etc.

    Natives normally control more of the traditional resources
like farmland. Foreigners specialize more in less visible, more
novel and sophisticated resources like undiscovered minerals
(exploration rights), navigation rights, radio spectrum,
overflights, bank charters, etc.

    Both these groups have the acutest incentive to influence U.S.
                            Rent-seeking and Global Conflict, p.4

policies, and large discretionary funds at hand. Therefore they
tend to dominate U.S. statecraft. The U.S. government is probably
more vulnerable to such foreign influence than most, because of
our size and weakly developed sense of honorable dedication to the
national interest. The English once terminated a dynasty, the
Stuarts, which was caught taking support from France; but
Americans hardly notice when retired Congressmen take work
lobbying for foreign sugar producers etc.

    Self-evidently, rivalry to appropriate limited rent-yielding
resources must lead to conflict. It has to, because land is not
produced, nor stored up like capital by saving. Modern economics
glosses over this by stressing that land, like other resources, is
allocated by the market. That may be, but distribution is
something else. Every land title in the world goes back to a
taking by force.

    It will be objected that one can buy in peacefully once a
tenure is firmly established, with alienable titles. There is
certainly no intent to deny this. The problem is that a
successor—in—interest stands on no firmer footing than the
original. There is no laundering: every landholder can consult his
chain of title and see how it originated. Indeed, it has been said
that those who buy stolen property are the chief cause of crime.
Fencing itself is a crime.

    However one may side on that question, it helps account for
the extreme alarm with which U.S. ètatecraft startles at any
foreign country, however weak and innocuous, which expropriates
any such successor—in—interest. Demonstration effects are
contagious and threatening. The defensiveness of the insecure is a
major cause of global conflict.

    More destabilizing yet is the ambitious rent—seeker offshore,
who finds his biggest gains in the riskiest ways, ways that
unfortunately impose high risks on the U.S. The biggest gains to
rent—seekers come from buying in on the ground floor, cheap, when
tenures are precarious or uncertain.

    Then one invokes the U.S. armed forces and the sanctions of
ancillary statecraft to raise the value of one's acquisition. The
three main concerns are to firm up precarious tenures (as by
supporting the government that granted them); to hold down taxes
(as by lending the U.S. armed forces); and to avoid pure
competition (as by giving preferential access to the U.S. market,
or Pentagon procurers).
    There have been spectacular success stories. Aramco is one. It
                            Rent-seeking and Global Conflict, p.5

originated in 1933 with a capital of $100,000. By 1970 it was
valued at well over $5 billions. Of course that increase might
represent accumulated capital flows from the U.S. owners; but such
was not the fact.

    There are four sources of value of foreign holdings: capital
flows, plowbacks, appropriations, and appreciation. In many cases
like Aramco the last two far outweigh the first. But they are
products of statecraft and force, not of capital inputs proper.

    Tenure granted by unstable governments is not worth much, and
is therefore cheap to acquire. In 1960, for example, Patrice
Lumumba pledged a substantial share of the Congo in return for a
relatively modest loan from a Wall Street financier.

    Of course there are also failures and losses, and someone
might even try to show that aggregate losses exceed aggregate
gains. But Adam Smith observed long ago that when an occupation
offers a small number of extremely high rewards, its
attractiveness is enhanced out of all proportion to their
aggregate value. It is not just the successes, but all the
attempts that provoke global conflict.

    We are trained and conditioned to think of land tenure as
something stable and inherited, with secure roots in history. In
fact, that which was inherited can never be taken as given unless
the origins bear examination. Past appropriation invites future
expropriation. One result of that -is a legal system even in
"capitalist" America which tolerates rather extreme invasions of
land value through zoning, rent control, taxation, and field price
controls, without there being a legal "taking" such as might be
prohibited by the 5th and 14th Amendments.

    But in addition, tenure is constantly being created at the
interfaces among sovereignties. Each is a potential flashpoint.
Title to land is also contested within many sovereignties, like
Mexico 1910—40, and Cuba 1962. Current examples are also nearby in
Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua. Every such internal contest
makes an international incident or crisis.

    Tenure is created at the margins of settlement and/or
exploration, as on the OCS; the margins of political stability;
and the margins of research and technology. In addition, tenure is
constantly being tightened and refined at higher levels of
intensity and demand for the services of scarce land. In recent
decades the unprecedented voracious resource demands of the United
States have been a major dynamic.
                            Rent—seeking and Global Conflict, p.6

    The views above have been characterized by some as "Marxist",
because of the explicit recognition of special class interests. If
this be Marxism make the most of it; the point if any is ad
hominem. But the views here differ from Marx's. For one, Marx was
an underconsuniptionist who attributed imperialism to a search for
overseas markets, not rent—seeking. For another, Marx made no
sharp consistent distinction between land and capital.

    The present views point toward specific policy changes. To
minimize global conflict, a nation should use its tax system to
recoup rents from beneficiaries of its statecraft. This would
deflate the rent—seeking incentive to provocative behavior, as
well as the discretionary funds used to gain political support.
There is little gain to the nation as a whole, and high cost, in
creating rents for a few individuals or corporations. A surtax on
income from foreign sources, for example, rather than the present
preferential treatment, is indicated.

    An analogous movement is already underway in municipal
affairs. Robert Freilich, a lawyer sometimes called the "father of
growth control", has worked out systems of urban growth whereby
newly annexed lands must pay the full costs of their own
development, instead of leeching on central cities as has been the
custom. This has, where applied, drastically cooled down the
passion for leapfrog annexations. I trust the analogy between
municipal and national imperialism is evident.

    To strengthen the nation and move toward justifying labelling
defense a "public good", a wider sharing of rents is indicated.
This is a simple matter of readjusting tax systems. Many oil—rich
jurisdictions already provide models, albeit modest in degree
(like Alaska's social dividend from oil royalties). Canada has a
partially-developed system of interprovincial equalization of
resource revenues. The result there, as one might expect, has been
to heighten the sense of national unity and patriotism in the
constructive sense, increasing the numbers of citizens honourably
devoted to the nation as such.
