                    TINE, TAXES, TJRNOVER, AND INTENS ITY
                              M. Mason Gaffney
                       Resources for the Future, Inc.

         I welcome the occasion to discuss comments by Thomson and Goldstein
(214.) on my "Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital" (9), (8). The subject
warrants continued recycling, which they have done a service to attempt.

They have done some disservice by erring on several points, which, however,
it is my pleasure to correct.
       To narrow the issues, I first identify matters of agreement. There
are more than meet the eye. T & G's litigious style differentiates their
product more than the content warrants.
        They agree that what they call an excise or severance or "gross" tax
is biased in favor of long life.-" They qualify this by toying with a

"Single Cycle Case" in which there is no bias, but the model is a nonesuch,

even though the proof based on it has become a clich of introductory capital

theory. Site is permanent, and since their approach is invariably to maxi-

mize site value, they must always do so in perpetuity, if only by allowing

a site salvage value in a speciously one-cycle model. So we may

miss    all their "Single Cycle Cases." They err (plausibly) in thinking my
cases   are "Single Cycle"    of which more later. There really are no single
cycle cases, except where land is abandoned after one pass. Life goes on.


      i/ In current American forestry usage an ad valorem harvest tax on
stumpage is called a "yield" tax. In 1967 (9)    I
                                                 used "severance" tax, and
T & G repeat my usage. In forest usage "severance" taxes are specific, so
it was an unhappy choice. I now comply with field usage     and call this
                                                                        a
"yield" tax, where forest examples are used.  However my subject  was taxa-
tion of all   capital,
                     not forests alone, so "excise" is a good term. "Gross,"
which T & G   favor, is too gross. Yield taxes arebased on stunipage, which
is the value of logs in the woods net of harvest costs.
                                    -2

      They also agree that a tax on land income is neutral. They bury this
by mislabelling their land tax an "Income Tax" (214., "D," Table 1, p. 32).
The base of this tax "D" is [V - Peim] (their notation, p. 32), that is
harvest value less planting costs compounded to maturity. The compounding
means interest on P is also deducted from the tax base, leaving nothing in
the base except the pure net product of the site.
      They do not explain why they call this the "income tax." The Federal
income tax would resemble it if planting costs were expensable in year zero:
this deduction would then have the same present value as deducting compounded
planting costs (r im ) in year m (maturity). Some European taxes come close
to this. But the income tax as we know it in the United States requires the
taxpayer to capitalize P and wait until maturity to deduct it (subject to
some chiseling).                  This is my usage in the article which T & G
purport to be discussing. It is their tax "C", which they variously call
"net severance," "capital gains," and "net tax" -- a babble of tongues all
at odds with current usage. The confusion could mislead many readers, and
creates a cover for their mislabelling a land tax -— their "D" -- as the
income tax.
      They follow my argument that conclusions about tax bias are affected by
assumptions about shifting. In their heat of contention they suppress what
I said, but interested readers may consult the record, pp. 312-3114-, and for

emphasis my concluding sentence, p. 323, "... the   neutrality is impaired by
shifting, and the only part of the income tax that may be made perfectly neutral

is the part that falls on land income." See also the next set of citations.
                                    -3-

         They agree that taxes not on land may often be shifted into lower

land values. (9, notes 2 and 5, 8, p. 179, n. 12; p. l8li., n. 17; pp.
187-90; pp. 195-97; p. 282; p. 11.11; and. especially pp. 419-2O). I close
by noting I have only scratched the surface of the relations between
interest and rent and "regard this as of first priority for extended. treat-
nnt in a seqtl.'t (p. 11.20) It is splendid that T & G followed my lead,

however ineptly; it would have been gracious of them to acknowledge it,

rather   than pick a fight. Incidentally I have also followed mr own
svggestion (3, 187-97 et passim and io).
      Finally, I can hardly dissent from their revelation of Faustmann's

formula to which I originally guided them during a correspondence (7) they

omitted from their credits, and which I used in the work attacked (8, p. 11.20).

Gentleman Jack Hirshleifer is too generous when in the work which T & G laud

he credits me with having "rediscovered" the formula (13, p. 89, n. 11.5), and

Pbter Pearse is too modest when, in the work T & G cite as their authority,

he says he is bringing my monograph (14.) to a wider audience (20, p. 178),

but of such excesses T & G are free. Their Appendix, at any rate, is a

passable restatement of my 1957 monograph (11.) and I cannot deny it.

      This broad area of agreement being established, we may zero in on

the few substantial differences. I will not squander space on their hasty

craftsmanship: their internal contradictions, unsupported pronouncements,
selective reading, appeals to authority, discourtesy, captious digressions,
shifting definitions, misimputation of meaning, suppression of material

information, and quarrelsome temper. These will be self-evident to the
careful reader, and tedious to the casual one.
                                    -'i. -




       I will dwell on four issues of substance: present value vs. internal

rate   of return; bias of the incon tax; the bias of the property tax; and
allocative effects of tax loopholes for land.
A. Present value vs. internal rate of return
       T & G take an adamant line against letting taxes lodge on the rate of
return. They reason as follows: Assume ... a constant interest rate,
(211., p. 27). Only this and nothing nre. It is hardly enough, even in a

matter of faith and imrals. The T & G criticism follows trivially from
assuming that taxes are shifted off capital while I assund not. Their case

against ir is not that I reasoned wrong, but that I entertained an heretical
assumption.
       It is not news that assumptions affect conclusions. I show later that
niy assumptions fit the circumstances I had in mind; and theirs change the
results less than they allege. But as to their attack, it is only an explora-
tion of the differences that stem from switching an assumption. They puff
it up into sonthing more general, but never discuss the basis of their

difference, the choice of assumptions. They do not conmnt on nnj discussion
of this choice, which is explicit (8, pp. 312-111., and other citations above).
So the critical aspects of their paper are only a courtroom device and at

once deflated.

       Let n paraphrase what I said about the choice of assumptions and tax

incidence. I distinguish an open and a closed tax jurisdiction. An open one
is too small to affect world interest rates, so I is hard fixed, exogenous,
given, and absorbs no taxes. The capital supply is infinitely elastic.
                                       -5-

Prices and wages are also given, for consistency. Land is the equity
interest  in the jurisdiction, so all taxes are shifted into lower land
rents. In this jurisdiction I find all taxes except on land value to be
unneutral, as they drive marginal land from use, and abort all marginal
activities, including timely renewal of sites (9, pp. 312-114; 8, pp. 195-
97,   282).
       As an interesting corollary, since land pays all taxes anyway, it

would be possible to replace all taxes in an open economy by one on land
values     (3, pp. 187-92). (I wonder if T & G are aware they are so close to
that position?)
       A closed tax jurisdiction on the other hand is a large one where the

supply of capital is not very elastic, so some taxes lodge on capital and

lower the post -tax rate of return. Most of my analysis, and the only part

that T & G read, dealt with this assumption.
       I   do not take a hard line that only the closed case is relevant. On
the contrary I lean more toward the open case: I just do not fail prostrate
with T & G. Circumstances alter cases. The circumstances dictating my
emphasis on the closed economy were several.
       First, I was discussing Federal taxation. I know we have a balance
of payments problem and a world capital market, and I would welcome a modi-
fied model which allowed for high elasticity of capital supply. But at the

national level the United States is so large in the world there is less
than infinite elasticity and we should make some concession to that in
building models.
                                    -6-


      Second, I was criticizing the income tax and gave it the most favorable
assumption, to anticipate a defense. It is child's play to show a.ll taxes

but a land value tax are biased in an open jurisdiction, because they drive
marginal land out of use and block out aU marginal investments.    The ad-

vocate of income taxes replies that capital supply is inelastic: investors
harg in there at a lower rate of return. My article shows that if that defense
be so, then the income tax has a time bias, so either way it's a loser. If
it can't drive investors away, it drives them into longer maturities. My
target was income-tax idolatry; I was influenced by a wish to communicate with
the large group whose support of the income tax rests on their assuming in-
elastic capital supply.
      I go on to show that assuming national capital supply inelastic makes
us conclude that a neutral national tax on property income would count un-
realized accruals as current income. T & G flatter me to suggest this is my
own crank. I merely rediscovered the wheel. Haig (12, pp. 7ff.), Simons
(23, pp. 61-62, 206), Ichman (21), Musgrave (18, pp. 1i.l, 60), Vickrey (26),
the Canadian Carter Commission (22, p. 39), Brazer, Sneed, Blum, Steger,
Surrey, White   (25) and the Ford Foundation (2) all have priority. I am out
alone in noting that the property tax, considered as a national institution,

is tantamount to a tax on Haig—Simons property income. AnalrticaUy the

conclusion is obvious, but is not likely to draw much support from income
tax reformers committed to "Revenue Sharing" to lower the property tax (an
inconsistency I wish they would explain or, better, abandon). I also

suggest that a local property tax, while not ideal, is better than a local
income tax. T & G evidently mistook my conditional for an absolute, and
                                      -7-

my   meliorative for a superlative. The differences are important, but
may assume too much of the unsubtie reader. Certainly they require a

careful reader. Here at any rate is what I said:
         "Let us summarize. Our accrued income tax, and. the property tax
that it resembles, are neutral interteniporally if capital absorbs the
full tax without shifting.    If capital emigrates to escape the tax, the

emigration is itself a tax-induced misallocation, and the tax is not
neutral. Only a tax on land, which cannot emigrate, can be fully neutral.
But if society does tax interest income, our accrued-income tax base pre-
serves intertenrporal neutrality among investments at that higher rate of

time-discount appropriate to the tax-induced scarcity of capital.     Thus

the accrued-income basis is distinctly superior to the realized-income

basis of taxation, containing an important element of neutrality which the
latter lacks, and the possibility of complete neutrality under the special
and. unrealistic assumption of nonemigration and nonshifting, or under the
realistic assumption that the property tax base be modified to exempt
improvements.
       Historical opposition to and. criticism of the property tax has re-
sulted from the tax's making very visible the destructive effects of

taxing the income of a mobile, migratory input like   capital.   That has

been especially true in forestry. But shifting to the realized-income

basis makes the tax no less destructive, only less conspicuously so. The

income   tax drives capital into longer maturities. It also sloughs the tax
burdens of property onto labor, 'which lacks equally effective means to
avoid taxes." (   9 , pp. 313-114).
                                    -8-

      Third, I was writing about general incon taxes and not taxes on timber
considered alone. My subject was not timber taxation as such, but taxation
of property incoite. Timber exemplified appreciating capital. There was
also full salvage capital and depreciating capital and. land. Yet T & G
never got it. Their talk of forward shifting has a micro-economic flavor
(2ll, p. 38) and they even have a case where equilibrium obliterates the
"forests." In context of nw work wh.tch they are ostensibly discussing that
should read "obli1erates the United. States." T & G remain staunchly obtuse
not to see that the supply of capital in general is less elastic than the
supply for one industry in one jurisdiction; and again not to see that forward

shifting   is a partial concept that is a retreat from the issues of incidence
of general taxes.
      To add to the confusion, T & G let the light in in one sentence -   only
to shut it right out. "Property taxes on all assets, by contrast, lower the
                    i
interest rate -- fails as p (the tax rate) rises -- so that the bias leaves
the forest and lodges in the capital market" (21i.,
                                                  p. li-O). They return forth-

with to belabor me with renewed vigor for pursuing that thought. I do not

understand their self-contradiction. They might.

       Fourth, to let the tax lodge in the rate of return is to let one abbre-
viate the analysis by omitting land. As T & G point out, if i won't give,
then one must ask what else can absorb the tax and the answer requires using

the more complete Faustmann franwork, which is essentially a way of adding
a third factor of production, land, to the inputs with claims on the product.
Simplification has its dangers, of course. It has seduced most analysts of

capital theory and incon taxation into omitting land from their studies, to

their great loss. I am pleasantly surprised that others are reversing the usual
                                      -9-


roles and insisting that I give more attention to land. But I show below

that one may add. land to the analysis, using Faustmann' s framework, let the

tax lodge in the rate of return -- and not change my original basic finding
of bias to long life.
        Fifth, to assume that the tax lodges in rate of return is actually a
compromise assuflTption in which some tax is borne by land rent. That is, if
site value be assurEd constant, and taxes lodge in rates of return, then it
must be that land rent (a) is being taxed. Otherwise land values would rise
(ii., pp. 53-55).

        T & G say several times that I am violating the rule that investors

seek to maximize present value. They are wrong. To pursue, as I did, the

assumption that yield and income and property taxes may    lodge in the rate of
return is not to assert that individual managers should or do maximize in-
ternal rates of return. Those are separate questions.
        In terms of manag' maximizing present values, my points would be

rephrased along these lines. 1hen taxes lodge in the rate of return, r <1,

where I is pretax and r is post-tax rate of return. Investors now maximize

the present values of their post-tax income using the lower rate r. At this

lower rate, longer cycles rise in present value relative to shorter ones, so
the preference for different investments is reordered in favor of longer ones.

        As before, assume a pretax equilibrium with R =   e, and FIR = 1,
where FIR present value of R. Apply a yield tax, and assume a trial r is
struck by the market, r <i. Now

        FiR =   e'(l t)ein = (1 t)e)in
                    -             -
                                                                       (i)

FIR is an increasing function of in, so long as r < 1.
                                   -10-

      Now nre reshuffling is needed, with resources pouring out of short
investments into long ones, until $1. invested in any maturity has a F = $1;
and so on, just as before. This is all implicit in the original approach.
If it helps some readers to have it spelled out this way, good.
      I do not take a hard line on the issue of whether managers should maxi-
mize present values or internal rates. I have shown elsewhere that the two
methods yield identical results in perfect markets, provided the analyst does
the job right (ii., pp. 52-58). "Doing the job right" means using Faustmannts
formula or an equi.valent means of including all inputs in the calculation.

      Faustmann's formula is historically associated with the approach of

maximizing present value, but that Is incidental. Connotation must not be

taken for denotation. The essential point is to enter a term for land which

is an input in year zero and is fully salvaged at maturity. Then we can

maximize the internal rate of return honestly.
                         .2/ and solving for i, Faustinann s formula becomes:
      Using T & G s notation—

               =
                    v+w
                     m
           e
                    p+w                                             (2)
               or

           = 1M Vpw
                  +W   m



where Vm is harvest value
     W is site value
      P is planting cost
      m is maturity.
      The reason calculations of internal rate of return have a bad name is
that imst of the calculators omit or understate W (site value), thus over-

      2/ As a courtesy to readers on whom T & G have already imposed an extra
burden of shifting from my original notation to theirs.
                                    -II-
stating the internal rate (and with it the contribution of management, the
wisdom of projects being promoted, etc.). We need      be wise as serpents

in beiaring that everyday fraud, and a good practical way is to insist on

maximizing present site value. But that is no reason to make a quarrelsome

medieval school of the matter. Mathematically the principles are equivalent.

Which to use is a matter of judgment and circumstances, which I have discussed

elsewhere (14, pp. 51-58).

      T & G thought I must be analyzing a single cycle case. It is an under-

standable impression, but wrong.   Note that when we define i in the Faustrnann

we are assuming an "infinite recycle" by entering a salvage value for land. (w)

in the numerator of (2). The salvage value of land is always based on "infinite
recycling," more familiarly known as capitalization. I let W = 0 in (2), which

then devolves to the simpler internal rate definition most people use. This
simplified the prose and. deferred land to a sequel, as I carefully noted.
But it did not imply a "single cycle case •"   To let a constant equal zero is

not to deny   it. My case dealt with infinite recycles, but on marginal land.
      My basic finding of bias does not depend on this simplifying assumption.
Since T & G raise the point, let us enrich the analysis by pursuing it.

Using their notation, let W > 0.   Now Vm has to cover interest on w (but not

recovery of W, which is separate) plus recovery of P with interest, so


      V(P+W)e'-W                                                      (3)


Note that this is simply Faustmann recycled, that is (2) again, solved for V.

      For the yield tax:

              (i-t) + w
      ern= Vin                                                        (14)
                                   -12-

Substituting (3),

      erm =eim (i-t)+t
                     W
                                                                       (5)


      (5) gives an excellent overview of factors affecting the bias of
general excise taxes. Several points stand out.

      First, this is like my original (3)   [cited by T & G (21., p. 31k) and
renumbered (7)) but using their notation and with the addition of a parameter

(t y)) to the right side.
      Second, the addition of t     moderates but does not eliminate the bias
in favor of longer life. The reasoning is the same as with my original equation

(li), (9, p. 310). When P = 0 it is like the income tax case exactly.
       Third, (5) devolves to the original case when W = 0, that is for marginal
land. Here, bias is a maximum. As W rises relative to P,the parameter grows
in its tempering influence to a maximum when P = 0, and/or W is very high. The

decline in r is least, and the sensitivity of r to in is least, when P = 0.
      (5) tells us the yield tax is biased in favor of a high ratio of W.
                                                                             P
That means it is harder on poorer land, and harder on intensive culture on
all land. It favors understocking, substituting land for labor.
      This is interesting new information, a new dimension to the picture.
The tax deters not only frequent inputs of planting labor but also heavy
inputs. But it does not change the original finding of a bias in favor of
long life.
      Next let us analyze the income tax. Herer
       rm    Vin (i-t) + w + tP
      e                                                                (6)

Substituting (3),
                                      -13-

      e   = (P-i) (tin    + t(P-4w)      e' (1 - t) t
                                                   +                (7)


      (7) is the same as my original income tax equation (li) because P and W
drop out. (7) tells us a general income tax, to the extent it lodges in

r < i, is biased in favor of longer cycles, but this bias is independent of
that is of land quality and intensity of use. (We will see that this conclusion
changes when the tax lodges in site value (W): then the bias is for ).


      No matter how you analyze tax incidence, someone will nip at you for not

doing it his way, and the analyst must be prepared to entertain various
assumptions and explain why he chose those he did. The above tools are
versatile and. should be adaptable to many circumstances.

B. Bias of the Income Tax when i is Fixed
      T & G seem to accept my mathematics. They agree, in their own endearing
way, that the internal rate of return after yield taxes is an increasing
function of life. They do not pick a nit from my finding that the internal
rate of return after income taxes is an increasing function of life, and in
the context this would. seem to imply unreserved endorsement. Under their
preferred assumption of a fixed i, they agree that a yield tax is biased in
favor of long cycles, as it also is under my original assumptions. They also
agree that a tax on land income (their 'TD") is neutral, as I found. That
narrows the issues. In their Table 1, p. 32, we have dismissed their "single
cycle" cases as imaginary. There remains in all of Table 1 only one point
of difference, therefore. Their II, C, which ty should call the income
tax (as I discussed),has no effect on life. This is I believe their prime
                                      -lIi -




contribution.     I cannot dispute it, being on record to the same effect (io).

Their formula in Table 1 is mathematically sound, as far as it goes, which

is not far enough.

      First, they might have derived it for us. Let îr = site value after

income tax when I is fixed.

          V(l-t) -   im + p = (l-t) Pe + tP + W(e i)(i-t)
                                               -                  -
                  im
                  e -l                             e -l
        = w(i -   t) -tP                                               (8)

  is not an explicit function of rn, seeming to indicate lack of time bias.
I will show this is only specious.

      (8) seems to suggest that the time-bias of a general income tax disappears

in an open jurisdiction, and hangs completely on assuming the tax lodges in

the interest rate. I believe this ou1d be an overstatement. Time-bias is
reduced when r 1, being replaced by a direct bias against P. But the bias

against P is also a bias against shorter cycles, as I show next.
      The bias against P stands out by looking at the percentage reduction,
                                I
(p.r.) of site value caused by the tax.
            W-n W+P
     p.r. = ____ = t

      p.r. is greater than the tax rate (for P > 0), and rises with F, which
                                                                      w
raises our suspicions at once. On marginal land. p.r. is infinite -- this

land is sterilized. All land is sterilized for which ii <0.     From (8)     that
is all land where:


     t(w+P)>w
           or


     t>                                                                (10)
                                       -15-
Clearly this is not a neutral tax in general. If it cannot drive capital
into longer maturities it drives it away altogether.
        Of course landowners may now reconsider the level of P. Some may

just survive, and all optimize by lowering P, that is by using their land
less intensively. This is another way of perceiving that the intensive

margin of land use is sterilized, just like the extensive. In general,

(9) shows that the hierarchy of land uses will be reordered, with less in-

tensive uses replacing more intensive ones. Consider two rival land uses

that are equally matched in bidding for land, but differ        in intensity,

measured by P. Imposing an income tax weights the balance heavily in favor

of the lower P.     More generally, consider a spectrum of rival land use plans
being considered for any given site. The drop in the present valis of the
alternative plans is an increasing function of P. Of rival uses that bid
equally for a site before taxes, the income tax tilts the advantage to those
using less P.
       T & G "finesse these complexities" (211., p. 28, n. 1) by assuming P
                                        like
constant.     That is their privilege,/truniping a partner's ace, but it does
lose the game. Evidently they made this move thinking otherwise, for they
say taxes leave P unchanged if taxes lodge in rents (ibid.). But (8), (9)

and (10) indicate a sharp bias against P on every quality of land. (8) is

a simple extension of their present value formula II, C, in their Table 3.

(211., p.   32), where taxes are assumed to lodge in the present value of land,
i.e. in rents.

       So the income tax is not neutral under their preferred assumption of

constant i. Its anti-labor bias is expressed directly, as a force against
                                    -i6 -

heavy labor inputs, instead of indirectly as a force against frequent labor
inputs. In fact the proper assumption lies between theirs and the other extreme,
so actual effects are some mixture of the two kinds of anti-labor bias.
       This leaves the question of whether and how a lower P value (planting
input) affects time bias.   T & G say it "depends on the type   of tree," (ibid.)
and. let it go. In fact, the bias against labor destroys the argument for

interteinporal neutrality. Lower P means longer life. I will give several

arguments.

       As an opener, a reliable clue to general findings is always to look at
marginal and slightly supramarginal land.   Marginal land connotes low dollar

yields, but that is only one of three reasons why land may be of low value.
The other two are high costs (P) and long life (in). Referring to (8), it
is   apparent that the income tax drives out lands and/or uses of lands that
are marginal by virtue of high P sooner than others which are margins.]. by
virtue of low yields or slow growth. Indeed., the tax   is not biased at all
against the lazy grower who lets nature do all the work, leaving P = 0.
      More generally, there are three reasons why lowering P will lengthen the
growth period. The explanations are long, but fundamental and. worth study.
       1. Capacity of site. A site has a limited capacity to hold trees and
let them grow.
       We are used to thinking of factor proportions in terms of fixed, short

cycles of investment and recovery -- cycles so short we treat input and

output as simultaneous. With this conditioning, we easily follow the line

of thinking that the primary function of more P is to get more final output, V.
                                     —17-

And this does make sense when rn is to be short anyway. If P is small the
site is partly empty.    To balance factors cafls for more growing stock,

of which P is the only source. A small tV returns        AP with interest; and
the site is responsive because underoccupied.
       But when in is to be long, it requires a large Vm to return tP with
interest. Take Faustmaim 's formula (2 or 3), hold site value (w) constant.
      ?JV
Now         tells us by how much Vm must respond to P in order to justify



                   elm                                                  (U)
To get the feel of this, let i = .072, at which rate em doubles every 10
                                                  rn/b
years, beginning from unity. That is, e072in=2           .So if in = 60, emn
  26 = 61i. This means the extra dollar spent on planting must add $61i. to
stumpage value to pay off; and conversely, a dollar saved in year zero is

as good as $61 of harvest. So naturally when cycles are      to be long the
premium is on miniiizing P.
       Now it is thinkable to get a 61i.-fold increase,given sixty years.

The problem is, the site gets crowded if P and in are both high. This is

a matter of diminishing returns. The value of growing stock is given by (3).

A representative value for P in the Pacific Northwest is $100 per acre; the same

for W (19, T. 3-7 and pp. 3-13).     If em = 61, v= $12,700. At a stumpage

price of $100 per F that represents 127 MBF.      100   F   is about all the
                                                             V
Douglas -fir that can be crowded on one acre. As a ratio,        equals a topheavy
127. So growth must halt . *

      *These figures are subject to wide current variation, and even greater forecast
variation. There is a rule of thumb that Douglas-fir physical growth on Site I(the
best) has a nan of one 1VF per year. At this rate it would never reach 100 F in
tin   topay 7.2 on $200. But the owners forecast higher prices and enjoy special
tax situations, which make the figures possible as given. They are illustrative
primarily. The facts are from Walter Mead (17). The conjectures are mine.
                                      -18-

        (3) shows that V is an increasing function of both rn and P. Given
W, and given a ceiling on V, P and in are substitutes. Adding to one is
an alternative to the other. Either alone crowds a site, both together

are too much.

        So then an incon tax motivates landowners to       reduce P, it tends to
lead them to use nxre tine (rn) in place of P to fill up the site before
harvest. Thus the incon tax lengthens cycles.
        A good way to perceive these relations is in terms of the stunipage to

regeneration ratio, Va/P. For long cycles to compete with short ones, the

grower must raise that ratio. To avoid overcrowding the site he must hold

down the stunipage value, Vm To do both at once, he holds down P. Thus

low values of P go with long cycles. The grower might also increase V/P

by raising V. But so long as he makes any of the adjustnnt by lowering

P, why, lower values of P go with longer cycles.

        The   simplest way to grasp the present point is to see that at maturity
the   stunipage to site ratio, VmjkI tends to be about the same regardless of
life, because of site crowding. Higher P causes earlier crowding and
earlier harvest.
        2. Initial outlays speed harvests
       When in is long, say 60, so     is 61i-,   and   = 127, we have seen that

more P is not very productive if used to raise V. But it is very productive
if used to shorten in.    That is another option, and an attractive one. Cutting

in by 1/6, or 16.7%, from 60 to 50,   cuts em in half and approximately doubles
site value    (w).   It is equivalent approximately to doubling V60 from
$12,700 to $25,500 (using the pararrters of our previous example).
                                            -19-

      Examine Faustmann's formula, solved for W (12).

          V e -im -P
                                                                           (12)
            1-e
Considering just the numerator, shortening in
                                            — by
                                                 10 years is as good as
doubling V (assuming      e = 2 rn/b ). Actually, shortening ni is even a trifle
better because it also lowers the denominator, but this is just a
dollop unless rn is down below 30 or so.
      More generally,
      m. -l
      5P i(PiW)                                                             (13)

(13) may be rewritten
              -P
                      —
                                                                            (111.)


   is unity when          =   i. So (i14.) says that reducing in by one year is
as good. as reducing P by i(P + w). For example, when P + W = $200, one
year off life is as good as $114. off P.
      Similarly,

                1         -         1
                                                                             15
              i(V + W)
                                iein(PIW)
and


             (\T+W)                e(P+W)                                   (16)


(16) says that one year off life is as good as adding ie(P+W) to V.
                                          —20-


In the example, with in = 60,     P'V =   .07 x $12,800 or $895.
         Note also that the absolute values of the partials (13) and. (is) are

decreasing functions of P. The more P has been             added,   the less the

drop in life needed to be as good as a drop in P or rise in V. That shows

increasing returns to P when used to shorten life. That is, the more P is

applied, the greater is the benefit of still more P provided it can be used,
and is used,to speed the recovery of capital already sunk.

         Likewise,   the partials are decreasing functions of W. The better the
land, the greater the benefit of recovering its unreaped harvests quickly.
         The above analyzes tradeoffs among P, V, and rn to keep W constant.
To confirm and round out the findings, let W be the dependent variable.
W   is very sensitive to in, when P and V are fixed. It gives a sense of

proportion to break down W as follows:

              V
        w =                                                                (17)


         With m = 60 and i = .072 as before


        w=-7  V      P
                                                                           (18)


         Cutting   rn to 50 more than doubles W by lowering the first denominator

to 31 (and hardly changing the second denominator).

        More generally,

               -i(P+W)
         ' = 1-e
(19)    says that reducing rn by one year adds about $11f to W, using the same
numbers as before. This is consistent with Equations 13-16. For low values
of in   the denominator becomes materially less than one, meaning a year off
rn adds more than $lL to w (but of course shortening in becomes progressively

harder as in shortens).
                                    —21--


       The upshot: when in is long it is feasible arid productive to use more
P to shorten in, but not to raise V. This implies that high P values go with

short rn values; and therefore that the incon tax, by forcing lower P values,
lengthens cycles.

      Now let us look at how P is used in the field to shorten in.

       One way is by thick planting, including control of weed trees, cattle

and rodents, and preparing soil for a good catch or take of seeds. The heavy

stocking causes much growth per acre in the early years, followed by early
crowding. Crowding slows growth. Slow growth on a large base prompts

harvest.

      Harvest is often deferred by thinning. But thinning is a partial

harvest -- completing one short sub-cycle -- and/or an investment in an

early future harvest -- beginning another short sub-cycle.

       Choice of spacing is important. If one plans on long life he need
not space trees so close, for they will need room as they grow. On the

other hand, Christmas trees and nursery stock are jammed tight together.

David Kiemperer, Forest Economist with Associated Oregon Industries, writes

that it costs rrx,re to start an acre of Christmas trees than an acre of saw

timber -   (lt).
       The reverse is understocking, the result of thin planting. The income

tax fosters understocking by holding down P. Forestry literature describes

a "trend to normality" of understocked stands (16, Table 12, and p. 28; 1 ,and

bibliography; 28; 27, and. bibliography). Understocked stands lay on little

wood per acre at first because there is little growing stock. But as the

trees grow they expand into ample space. So in middle years when heavy
                                    -22-

stands exhaust their space, thin ones keep growing. Fast growth on a small
base defers harvest. More bluntly, you can get away without regenerating
forest land if you are willing to wait longer for harvest.

       A second general way for P to shorten rn is by very directly giving

growth a head start. A high cost regeneration is to plant seedlings from
nursery stock, aged. about four years. Another high cost method is to avoid

clear cutting and save the saplings as you take the riper trees. Both

practices obviously get the new generation off to a flying start. Early

harvest, rather than stumpage volume, is the primary gain.

       Medium cost regeneration entails seeding, with accompanying spending

on scarifying the soil to improve the probability of a good take;fencing out

cattle; rodent control; hardwood control; burning brush, followed by fire

control; fertilization; removing weed trees, including slow-maturing ones;

and so on.

       Low cost regeneration comes right down to zero. Many forest acres are

managed, or mismanaged, this way. A major penalty is the slow start.

Natural regeneration, even from seed trees left standing, takes 7 - 15
years for Douglas-fir in Oregon (19, pp. 3-11). In addition, hardwoods

start faster and invade an open site, causing understocking (ibid., pp. 3-12

15).

       Natural seeding also means the owner has no control of seed quality.

Research in forest genetics has produced faster-maturing strains; but the

landowner must expend some cost to buy and plant them.

       In terms of factor balance and proportions, long cycles are inherently

wasteful.    They begin with raw land and little capital. The land is barren
                                    —23-


during a long initial period of underuse. Then growing stock accumulates,

until in later years there is a topheavy imbalance, with more stock than
the site can carry.
       When a manager goes to work on land, he naturally applies stock where

there has been too little -- to the barren early years. Filling that early

void with growing trees naturally also brings them sooner to maturity.

        3. The need to fill the site

       A small volume of growing stock cannot yield a surplus large enongh to

pay land rent. On long cycles, stock grows large with time, and the lost

rent of the slow early years is diluted by averaging with later years. On
short cycles, the necessary stock must be applied by investing in regeneration.
Otherwise there can only be a meager harvest.

        Of course even a meager harvest might pay the rent (support a high
land value) if received frequently and with little cost. The limit however
is   that to pay rent that way, the short cycles would have to achieve un-
realistically high rates of annual growth. Growth must pay rent (interest
on w) as well as interest on stock, and. if the stock is small the growth
rate must be high.
       A precise mathematical statement is almost essential to confirm the

reasoning. Let x be the annual growth rate connecting P and V.

             V
       e =—m
        xm
                                                                     (20)

Substituting (3) and solving for x:


                                                                     (21)
                                                -211.-

              (21) defines values of x required to cover all charges: interest,
 rent, and cost recovery.

          x is a decreasing function of rn. Note that (21) is the same in form
  as Equation (LI.)) of w 1967 article (9, p. 310). The several expositions

 used there may be adapted here as well, mutatis mutandis. The                           mutation
 is that t of the original becomes -                    and the change of sign reverses

 the effect of the parameter. Appendix I proves the case. It is better
 than the previous proof (8, p. 106).
          When in is large, x -,        i. When rn is small, x can become uncomfortably
 high,   if    large -- that is if little stock is applied to good land.
                is

 The way to hold down x when in is small is to apply more P. Table 1 is a
 nunrical example calculated from (21).
          Table 1.     Values of x, the growth rate connecting regeneration
                                 cost ()and harvest             value (v).
                       exm      m im  WW
                                —=e (l+) -                           (i= .072)
               urn           W1                     ( = 1)
                                                    W                              W
                                                                                       = 5)
                            (- = .)                                            (•p
                         xm                                                    ian
                        e         x              exrn        x                 e          x
 1        1.07          1.08          .08       1.114        .111.        1.142           .142
 2        1.15          1.18          .08       1.30        .111.         1.90            .32
 3        1.23          1.27          .08       1.146       .13           2.38            .29
 5        1.11.1        1.50          .08       1.82        .12           3.91I.          .25
10        2.0           2.2           .078      3           .11           7               .20
20        14            14.6          .076      7           .10          19               .15
30        8             9.11.         .0711.   15           .09          143              .13
140      16            19             .073 31               .09          91               .11
50       32            38             .073 63               .o8         167               .10
60       614           76             .072 127              .08         379               .10
                                        -25-

          More generally,


                             —   -1
                                                                     (22)

                                 l-e +1]
      is a decreasing function of both in and P. That means when rn is small,
x is nre sensitive to P, a point evident in Table 1 as well. By appliing
nre P to short cycles one reduces x. With long cycles, x is low by virtue
of high in, and insensitive to P (unless P is nearly zero).

          Summing up, P and. rn cannot be small together without making x become
unattainably high. Therefore for short cycles one must raise P; and for low
planting inputs one must lengthen in.     The result is that low P values go with

high in values. The income tax that forces down P therefore and thereby lengthens

in.

               It is easy to get buried in difficult details. What emerges
from it all is sweeping and simple.       If is already long, P is most pro-
                                               in


ductive when used to shorten in; if in   is already short, P is most productive
when used to raise V.       So P and in are inversely related: low P means long

cycles.

          Therefore the income tax, by virtue of its bias against P, is also

biased against shorter cycles, even in the circumstance of perfectly elastic
supply of capital.

C. Bias of the Property Tax
           taxes lodge fully in r, the rate of return after taxes, and t
          If

is the property tax rate, then r + t = 1, where i is the no-tax rate of return.
                                              -26-


The base of the property tax is         asset value, the same as the base that
earns interest.  It follows quite directly from those assumptions that the
property tax would be neutral. The taxpayer uses (r + t) where before he

used i in making choices.         My original article could be summarized as an
exploration of that theme.          Curiously, T & G concede the point   (211.,   p. 11.0),
although   they don't let it interfere with their train of thought.
          primarily,       they emphasize that the property tax shortens cycles,
assuming i    is fixed.       Their methods   do not do. First they lean on authorities
-- Groves, Fagan, and Macy. These were writing at the time from a local

viewpoint, implicitly assuming i to be fixed. But in 1967 Groves came to nw

support    (11). Second, T & G maximize the value of a single-cycle case

(their Equation 9a, p. 1O), abandoning their basic method of maximizing

land value.    Third, they emphasize marginal conditions at end-of-cycle,

ignoring effects on starting-up time. Net result: partiality leading to
error.

          Let us       define site value net of property taxes on trees, assuming
i   is fixed. We will see that the afleged bias to short life is weak, but
there is a strong bias against labor and indirectly therefore against
short life.
          Let 0 be site value after a property tax on trees which lodges in
site value.



                   -
                                                                            (23)


Substituting (3), and summing,




           ewt(Pw)                                                           (2k)
                                       -27-


The percentage reduction of site value is:


                   w-e =t                   m
          p.r. =
                    w     (!w + 1)                  -
                                                        1                (25)
                                       3.   -e

Several conclusions follow from sensitivity analysis of (25). To save

space, I present these without the steps of proof.

          1. p. r. >t.

          2. p. r. is an increasing function of P, and is very sensitive to P.

The taxpayer abates the full force of the tax by applying less P. This is

true   at all rn, but more so at longer in.      So the property tax discourages full

stocking.    We have already seen that lower P values tend to lengthen cycles.

          3. p.r. is a decreasing function of W. The tax is harder on poorer
lands,   and sterilizes marginal lands.
          ii. p.r. is an increasing function of in, but only a weak one.        The
             in                                   ..        1
                           upwards from a minimum of - when in = 1 to maxima
          1 -e im ranges
fraction

negligibly greater than in for in over about 50 (and limited by limits on rn).
It is a badly balanced tax literature which has emphasized this weak effect
and excluded the stronger bias against P. Indeed, the strong anti-labor
bias may overcome the weak anti-waiting bias and lengthen cycles -- that is
indeterminate here.
        To explain this in literary form, the property tax penalizes having
capital on the land over a whole cycle of growth, not just at the end. Indeed
it is relatively harder on early capital than late capital, because the former
is taxed earlier and more often. So its strongest effect is to hold down P,
which tends to lengthen life. Then, at that lower level of stocking, it is
mildly biased in favor of short life. The net effect is the resultant of

the two vectors, and the first one is not subject to simple generalization.
                                       -28

D. Ailocative effects of exempting land income
           T & G conclude by seeming to agree that land taxes are neutral.

Captious to the end, they turn this into a gibe by dismissing my complaints

about how land income escapes the income tax as improper "equity arguments ."
It is not clear if they are really obtuse or just posturing, but I patiently
respond.

           1. Equity is important. Why do we have an income tax at all instead

of a heavy poll tax?      It's something about fair shares, ability to pay, and
all   that.   The fact that wealthy landowners pay lower effective rates than

lowly wage earners has a lot to say about how fit this tax may be for its

alleged redistributive purpose. The fact thatunearned rents, increments
             taken from the community
and enrichments/are taxed lower than services rendered to the community

by human effort offends another equity concept.
           2. Exempting land income necessitates higher taxes on other income,

increasing allocational bias.

           3. Land income is exempt by virtue of loopholes to use which land-

owners misaflocate land. I discussed several examples in the papers at

issue (8, pp. 30, 1l0, 11.13- l4, 1416-214.) and many more elsewhere (5,   3).
           T & G here as elsewhere indicate a belief that taxes must be neutral

if they take land rent. It is a good instinct gone wrong.       Rent is a surplus
that may be tapped without excess burden by skillful policy, but which may

also be and    is being impaired by the clumsy tax methods we actually have (6).
           In general, taxing wages while exempting land causes land. to be

substituted for labor. Land is used less intensively. The results are

several.      One is to spread out land settlement, increasing the length of
streets and. all lin.kage lines.   Another is to reduce the aggregate demand for
labor, disemploying people.
                                    -29-

       Ii. Land values are made and broken by public policy and works.
The income received for rendering useful services is called "ordinary"
and is fully taxed. The income received for expending money and. effort
to influence governnnt to help develop onets land is called a "capital
gain" and virtually exempt. "Produce," says the fisc, "and your income
is half mine. But lobby, bribe, wine and dine, influence, corrupt, beg
and thine, and the resulting increase of land values is all thine." It

affects how people spend time.

        In fine, I have shown four things.

       A. The choice between maximizing present value or internal rate

of return is one of circumstances and judgment, not theology.

       B.   Maximizing present value instead of internal rate reduces time
bias of income taxes, but increases anti-labor bias, which turns out to be
a time bias as well.
       C. Maximizing present value instead of internal rate prevents the

property tax from being neutral, but its bias is more against labor and

less   against slow cycles than usually believed.
       D.   Exempting land. income is a serious a.llocative as well as equity

matter.

       The importance of this topic should not be lost in the detail. The

major point is that the tax system in various ways intercedes in market

choices and lowers demand for labor. With unemployment never conquered,

and re-emerging as national problem number one, it    is worth suffering with
the tedium to confirm the new implications that emerge for tax policy.
                                  -30-

The maligned property tax scores high, and the land part very high.

Income taxes score so-so, and only that well because fast write-off
may make the income tax reseithle a land. tax. Excise taxes flunk.
      These are controversial findings. I hope they provoke more
discussion to resolve any questions.
                                           -31-

                                        APPENDIX 1*


            Proof that required growth rate, x, is a decreasing function of



                  =e (l+)W -e
life, rn.

            e
             xm V          W
                           im                                                i
            xm 2n e                                                          (l,a)
            To   Prove: dx
                           din

                  dn0 is
            g =              •, the growth rate of 0(m)                      (2)




            0=fdftemg                                                        ()


            Substituting (l,a)

            x= gdin                                                          (it)

By inspection of (Ii.) and the Theorem of the Mean, x must be failing if

g is monotonicafly failing,          i.e. if      <0.


                                               <o       (>0)                 (5)




                                                               Q.E.D.

*With thanks to Matt Gaffney, Jr., John Hoven, and Steve Hanke.


Note that this proof may be applied to the income tax case by replacing

  with -t (tax      rate).       It may be substituted for (8) Appendix 1.
                                         -32-

                                     REFERENCES

  1. P.A. Briegleb and J.W. Girard, "New Methods and Results of Growth
Measurement in Douglas-fir," Jour. of Forestry 1911.3, Ii.1, 196-201.
    2. Ford Fdtn, The Law and the Lore of Endoment Funds 1969, New York.
    3. M. Gaffney, "Adequacy of Land as a Tax Base," The Assessment of
Land Value (ed. Daniel Holland), Madison, 1970, 157-212.
    11.M. Gaffney, "Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber," A.E. Info.
Series No. 62, Raleigh, 1957, 1960.

   5. M. Gaffney, "Coordinating Tax Incentives and. Public Policy: The
Theatment of Land Income," Hearings on Econ. Analysis and the Efficiency
of Government, 1970, U.S. Congress, Joint Econ. Committee, Subcomm. on
Efficiency in Govt., Part 2, pp. 11.05_15.

    6. M. Gaffney, "Land Rent, Taxation, and Public Policy," Papers of the
Regional Sci. Assoc. 1970, 23, 111.1-53.

   7. M. Gaffney, letters to Henry Goldstein and Procter Thomson, 1-16-68,
2-16-68, 5-20-70.

    8.     M. Gaffney, "Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital" (unabridged), Am.
Jour. Econ. & Soc., Jan., April, July, Oct., 1970; Jan. 1971, 29, 25-32,
179-97, 277-87, 11.09-211.; 30, 105-U.

   9. N. Gaffney, "Tax-induced Slow Turnover of Capital," Western Econ.
Jour., Sept., 1967, 5, 308-23.

  10.      M. Gaffney, "Tax Policy and Capital Rotation," unpublished Ms., 1970,
16-11.3,   App. IV, 1-23.
  U. H. Groves, letter of 7-l8-67,on file.

  12. R.M. Haig, "The Concept of Income," The Federal Income Tax (ed. R.M.
Haig), New York, 1921.

  13. J. Hirshleifer, Investment, Interest, and Capital. Englewood Cliffs,
1970.

  lii.     D. KLemperer, letter of L1.-26_71, on file.
  15. T. Lowry, letter of 12-70, on file.

  16. A.L. MacKinney and L.E. Chai.ken, "Volume, Yield, and Growth of Loblolly
Pine in the Mid-Atlantic Coastal Region," Appalachian Forest Exp. Sta. Tech.
Note No. 33, Ashville, April 1939.
  17. W. Mead, letter of 12-9-70, on file.
                                    -33-
   18. R. Musgrave, "In Defense of an InconConcept," Harvard Law Rev.,
1968, 81, I.t-62.

   19.  Palo Alto Research Associates, "Forest Tax Study," for Wn. State
Forest Tax Committee, July, 1970.

   20. P. Pearse, "The Optimum Forest Rotation," Forestry Chron., June,
1967, )43, 178-85.

   21.  J. Pechman, "Comprehnsive Income Taxation: a Comment," Harvard Law
Rev., 1968, 81, 63-67.
  22. Royal Commission on Taxation, Report of the Royal Commission on
Taxation, 1966, 3, Ottawa.
   23. H. Simons, Personal Income Taxation, Chicago, 1938.

   21i. P. Thomson and H. Goldstein, "Time and Taxes," Western Econ. Jour.,
March 1971, 2' 27-11.5.

   25. U.S. Congress (86th, 1st), House,Committee on Ways and 1ans, Tax
Revision Compendium of Papers on Broadening the Tax Base, 1959.

   26. W. Vickrey, Agenda for Progressive Taxation, New York, 19147.

   27. R. W. WeUood, "Trend Towards Normality of Stocking,'t Jour.
of Forestry, 1911.3, 11., 202-09.

   28. Weyerhaeuser Timber Co., Empirical Yield Tables for Douglas-fir,
1914.7, Tacoma.
