              Peace Dividends, Land Bubbles and Economic Disasters in U.S. History
                                              Mason Gaffney


   Delivered to Biennial Meetings, International Union, Kings College, London, March 1991, to
be published in Nicolaus Tideman (ed.), Papers of the Conference.
                                               Introduction
   Jimmy Carter, when U.S. president, tried to inspire his people by declaring the need for a
"moral equivalent of war." The thought was not original—it came (I think) from James Harvey
Robinson, and might have been inspired by the forgotten author1 of "Onward, Christian soldiers,
marching as to war!" By the old Chinese proverb, "It is easier to face a common enemy than to
share a surplus."
   Carter didn't claim originality. What was original was the sound of a statesman flattering the
public's intelligence with a serious idea. Sadly his enemies mocked him for it, and it passed, like
other serious thoughts, out of the public dialogue. Still, the fact is apparent through all human
experience: war and preparation for war work up community spirit and willingness to share. The
spirit, in turn, begets egalitarian and social legislation that would seem radical in peacetime.
   This sharing takes the primary form of paying taxes. A book on war finance, for example, is
what triggered Henry George's special interest in taxation. The book is On the Strength of
Nations, by Andrew Bisset. George learned from Bisset how the wars of early England were
financed. Kings required landowners, their vassals, to raise, supply, and equip fighting men.
These feudal levies were paid from rents of the kings' lands the vassals held. It followed that a
peace dividend would let landowners enjoy their rents without obligation, raising land prices. It
would also lower their incentives to settle their lands with retainers, leading to the kinds of social
and economic problems we know too well today.
   George also wrote that taxes on bases other than land still come partly out of land rents.2 This
point has bothered and puzzled many students of George. They ask, what is so important about
taxing land directly, if landowners pay all taxes anyway? George answers in one of his graphic
analogies: a horse can carry a heavy load well balanced and packed on its back, but be hobbled
by a smaller load lashed to its legs.
   Others before and after George have made the same point that most taxes come out of land
rent. These others include John Locke, Jacob Vanderlint, Francois Quesnay, and Paul Douglas.
Because of Quesnay's pivotal role in economic thought, it is called "the Physiocratic doctrine of
tax incidence." Fred Harrison and I have both expounded it. In this work I will take it as a
premise.


   1
    Sabine Baring-Gould

   2
    Progress and Poverty, pp. 300-303; Protection or Free Trade? pp.
Gaffney             Peace Dividends, Land Bubbles, and Economic Disasters                         2


                                 The 19th Century Land Cycle
   Through the 19th century there was a roughly nineteen-year cycle of rising/falling land prices,
accompanied by territorial expansion, with flows and ebbs of capital and labor migrating. There
were peaks—i.e., slumps beginning—in 1798, 1819, 1836, 1857, 1873, and 1893. The shortest
period there is sixteen years; the longest, twenty-one: not quite as regular as Old Faithful geyser,
but remarkably so for mass human movements that end like the fabled migration of lemmings.
The most detailed work is Homer Hoyt's 100 Years of Land Values in Chicago, 1833-1933. Its
definition of major cycles is confirmed in dozens of other studies, and probably hundreds of
general histories, and seems irrefutable.
   Not everyone has observed it. Marx wrote of a ten-year cycle. Juglar, Kitchin, and
Kondratieff have given their names to cycles of other periods. Farm economists are content with
their corn-hog cycle. Wall Street experts care mainly about short-term forecasting of stock
prices. Wesley Mitchell and his National Bureau, pursuing a deliberately directionless policy,
ramble randomly through micro-details of everything except land cycles. Ordinary modern
economists, with myopic expertise focused on monetary policy and national debt management,
seem happy to seal off land economics in a separate compartment to ignore. The Great Land
Cycle is for them at most an incident, a byproduct of banking policy. In this study, however, I
bypass such foolishness and premise the dominance of the nineteen-year land cycle that is so
obvious to whoever will look.


                   The Peace Dividend Factor Following Two World Wars
   Projecting the cycle into the 20th century, however, the clock stops ticking so regularly. The
crash scheduled for 1912 or so did not occur. If we pretend it did, or would have without World
War I, then 1929 is not far off schedule. After that, however, there is nothing comparable (unless
the current slump shall worsen). By general understanding, World War II must somehow have
interrupted the Hoyt timetable, but how, and why? When and why will the Great Land Cycle
resume? Those who would forecast by projecting need answers. We are not dealing with a
simple mechanical matter: circumstances alter cases. Let us liken the boom/slump cycle to the
course of a sickness. The ailment that runs ten days in a child may last six days when she is
mature and, on the third pass, kill.
   The missing element that aborted or damped the postwar land cycle was a major peace
dividend. Instead of a peace dividend there was the Cold War. We demobilized in 1946, but not
for long. The Truman (containment) Doctrine, the Russian bomb, and in 1950 the Korean War
launched a long era of high peacetime tax rates and dependence on federal spending. These did
not entirely stifle, but did damp, the otherwise predictable postwar land boom.
Gaffney             Peace Dividends, Land Bubbles, and Economic Disasters                         3

   In addition, the housing element of the boom after World War II was more stably financed
than prior ones. The home mortgage revolution replaced the five-year term with the twenty- and
thirty-year term, reducing the probability of panic selling.
   From 1918 to 1929, in contrast, we had all the elements for the land boom that occurred, and
led to the crash of 1929.
   First, military spending and taxes dropped sharply. Withdrawal, repudiation, and isolation
were the mood of the times. We actually paid down the national debt, something that also
happened 1885-1893, before a major crash; and 1825-1836, before another.
   Second, pacifism stood high. We had fought a "war to end wars." The Washington Naval
Treaty of 1922 ended the naval race that had cost so dear for many years before World War I.
The Kellogg-Briand Peace Pact of 1928 "outlawed war as an instrument of national policy." In
Britain, Churchill was out and discredited. Austen and Neville Chamberlain led a successful anti-
tax, anti-preparedness movement that dominated British politics through 1938.
   Third, employers had won the class war. Following the Palmer Raids and what Louis F. Post
called "The Deportations Delirium of 1920," sharp wage cuts were accepted all around. The
Progressive Movement with its anti-trust activism was out; Herbert Hoover and industrial
"associationism" were in. A larger share of national income was to go to property owners.
   Fourth, local government spending was widely diverted from social services to underwriting
urban sprawl and land speculation.
   The four factors triggered and supported a classic 19th century land cycle, 1919-1940. The
land market reached a broad peak in 1926-1927; the stock market a sharp one in 1929. The
slump lasted nearly twelve years, a record.


                                  The Missing Slump of 1912
   What went right around 1912, that the scheduled downturn never arrived? Here is the first
notable break in the clockwork schedule of the prior century. There were several major factors.
   First, the United States had entered the world naval race in the 1890s, building the world's
third-largest navy, after England and France. Manifest Destiny led to overseas possessions and
war with Spain in 1898. The war was minor in itself, but that plus Hawaii, Cuba, the Philippines,
Panama, Guam, Puerto Rico, etc. inflated our idea of a proper navy. In 1894 Congress had
passed a personal income tax. It was aborted, to be sure, by a constitutional flaw, but it clearly
manifested a new temper and portentous new federal revenue demands.
   The election of 1900 was fought over imperialism; imperialism won. Theodore Roosevelt
accelerated the naval buildup. Federal taxes rose: there were excises, tariffs, and in 1909 a
corporate income tax. The Dingley Act tariff of 1896 was the highest in our history up to that
time. Like most tariff hikes, it came during a slump. The Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act of 1909 hiked
Gaffney             Peace Dividends, Land Bubbles, and Economic Disasters                          4

rates even higher, and unprecedentedly did so during moderately prosperous times. It was
extremely unpopular, splitting the Republican Party, but only led to the personal income tax
amendment for an alternative revenue source.
   Those negative factors stifled the land price boom that might otherwise have followed the
crash of 1893, and the reflation beginning with 1896. Without a boom, there is less height to fall.
There was, to be sure, a building boom and a stock market boom. There was, however, no land
price boom. Neither was there much urban sprawl: infilling was the mark of the period. Hoyt's
time series show this prosperity to be much more stably based than others. To explain this, a
second factor is needed.
   Second, there was a massive shift to property taxation. In Chicago, property taxes rose about
seven times, while land prices only doubled, 1896-1920. The real tax rate apparently rose
several-fold. This, the "fiscal equivalent of war," must have held down and stabilized land prices.
   Why would this have occurred? A nation was urbanizing, and a nation wanted urban services.
Clean water supply and sanitary engineering and public health were heavily supported,
stimulated by fear of cholera. Communicable diseases were a major threat to life: this was "the
medical equivalent of war." In German working neighborhoods they built public baths with the
Roman name natatoria. Mass transit was essential: this is when they opened subways in Boston
and New York, and had the nickel fare in Cleveland. Mass education was needed for a newly
technical urban world. In farming, we were entering the age of irrigation: the California Wright
Act had been passed in 1887; operating districts were formed rapidly after 1900.
   This was also the age of Henry George and his movement. George had not created the spirit
of his time, he was part of it, rising now and then to near the top. Still, reading George gives you
not just his ideas, but a flavor of the larger movement he exemplified in enhanced form. The first
wave of Georgism, allied in New York with socialism, crested and fell back after 1886; a second
wave, a national movement allied with Populism, washed back in the McKinley landslide of
1896.
   A third wave, however, came on strong during the Progressive Movement, merging with it
and rising to power. Progressivism affected both parties, nationally and locally. It was an
infectious idea, worldwide: this was the era of Lloyd George, Sun Yat-sen, Joseph Fels, Leon
Walras, Knut Wicksell, Tom Johnson, Louis F. Post, Newton D. Baker, George Record, Samuel
Seabury, Samuel Jones, Warren W. Bailey, Henry George Jr., the Manhattan Single Tax Club,
W.S. U'Ren, and hundreds of other influential statesmen and groups around the world who saw
things much as George did.
   The widespread perception of a land problem was related to historically low cap rates; that is,
high price/rent ratios of land. The "labor-price of land" had risen in 1890 to an all-time high, in
Europe and America. Urban densities, too, were at all-time highs. The factual basis of the case
for taxing land values was never so patent; thinkers, voters, and statesmen responded.
