                             South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992
                                 When Mandela Succeeded de Klerk
                                          Mason Gaffney


   This is a "debriefing" after two weeks in South Africa. Substantive matters have been reported
elsewhere. Here are a traveller's impressions (in the 18th century tradition) of exotic lands and
peoples, beginning with the English at Heathrow.
   The prime purpose of my trip was to deliver an invited paper at a conference at the University
of (Universiteit van) Pretoria. Conference topic: A Land Tax for the New South Africa? Sponsor:
The Centre for Human Rights Studies, School of Law. Convenor: Law Professor Riel Franzsen,
son of gray eminence Daantjie Franzsen, who also attended. Daantjie (aka Daniel) is a semi-
permanent special advisor to the Treasury Department, Republic of South Africa (RSA). In RSA
today, big people are reexamining fundamental matters. "May you live in interesting times" is a
curse, but interesting times are also exciting, bracing, exercising, challenging, and restorative.
   To spread the overhead of the trip, my energetic sponsor, Godfrey Dunkley, arranged several
other talks in Johannesburg (Jo-burg) and Cape Town, so I saw more than the tidy
administrative-educational center, Pretoria. There was no time for safaris or winery junkets, but
in a strange land, the quotidian is the adventure.


    1. LAX to London via British Airways (BA), on red-eye. London is hardly on the great circle
route to Jo-burg. There is also JFK-Johannesburg on South African Airways (SAA). It is a
measure of RSA's isolation that there are only three trips a week from JFK. It is a measure of
airline pricing that the cost is the same either way. It is a measure of my dull imagination that I
overlooked the personal cost of the extra flight time.
   LAX-Heathrow I had three seats, slept well, arrived on time. It was to be my last good
experience on BA. For its transgressions, see Appendix I.


   2. Oxford. Five-hour layover at Heathrow. My friend and co-editor Fred Harrison met me for
a chat, impulsively decided to make it more interesting by driving me to Oxford in his elderly-
but-muscular Rolls. Fred says he never drove at Daytona, but he could fool a lot of people, even
allowing that driving on the left adds confusion to speed and rule-bending. (Do they race
clockwise in Britain?) He easily made it there for a leisurely tea and crumpets, a short tour, a
nice walk, a whiff of culture, and two lungs full of smoke.
   Smoking. The first thing this fussy Yank abroad notices is tobacco in public places, even
elevators. We are years ahead of the world in civilizing the weed. Good for us, but how sad that
foreigners who ape our worst examples ignore this good one. Smoke-stink started in Heathrow.
Fred, an Oxford alum, took me for tea to his old debating club, oozing prestige, tradition, culture,
and apparently smoke, which spread as invasively and hung as heavily as in the proverbial
political den.
  More generally, Brits seem less concerned with physical health, or the appearance of it, than
Americans. Smoking may just be part of a larger cultural difference, not all of which favors us.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                    2

While Brits tolerate smoke more than we, they tolerate noise less: take your choice, if you have
one. Would you rather be shot than hanged? That's what economists today call "Freedom to
Choose."
    Countryside. Heathrow-Oxford, note lack of scattered subdivisions. Also lack of farmhouses.
Straggling hedgerows, a few sheep and cattle browsing, that's about it. The Explainers always
cite "good reasons"—you know, people who feel they must produce a proper reason for
everything that is or is not, and screen out the possibility of system failure. However, it looks
strangely uneconomical not to raise food intensively that close to one of the world's great
markets. Can this be market failure? Planning failure? Any kind of failure? One thing for sure, it
is not rain failure.
   Town and Gown. Oxford streets are, of course, narrow, quaint, and picturesque; buildings
wall to wall; parking scarce and costly; street life crowded and active; bookstores properly
bustling. Off-street, however, we strolled through what felt like deserted ruins. The college we
were in—Christ Church College, I believe—was all turned inward, like Narcissus, with nothing
but empty space at the center and old, cold stone walls around us. If crowded streets are a
"Tragedy of the Commons," there is a counterpart "Tragedy of the Uncommons," the deserted
off-street lands. Arthur Young wrote "The magic of property turns sand into gold" (Travels in
France, 1787), but that doesn't quite hit the mark. The gold is at the frontage or interface
between common street and private property: "edge effect" is the generic term. Edges are where
the action is, where life teems and trade flourishes.
   Magdalen Bridge makes a peaceful, classic scene. However, there is no peace over who shall
pay to repair it. Local scuttlebutt faults Magdalen College for free-riding.
   Chapel. We enter a lovely, long, narrow chapel on one of the deserted campuses. I now
suppose this was the Christ Church of Christ Church College, but this detail was lost in our
preoccupation with editorial discussions. In the moment of silence I felt the eternal pull of faith,
refuge, respite, and meditation. The old stained glass and dark vaults evoke mystery. Was I
feeling the presence of great-grandmother's relative, John Henry Newman, of the early 19th
century "Oxford Movement?" He must have trod these same stones, thinking deep thoughts.
   I couldn't help contrasting the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, California, which fails to
arouse that feeling. How does one find refuge in the "Park-and-Worship" lot? Where is the
mystery in the face of a TV evangelist? Where are the Sheltering Arms and the Virgin mother
inside a building designed to resemble a cut diamond, like the world HQ of Anglo-American,
formerly de Beers' syndicate, which I was soon to see in Jo-burg? In either case, it is this world
that needs our attention after chapels restore us, so it was back to daylight.
   Brain drain. I comment on the brain drain from Oxford, due to high taxes (or low pay,
depending on your politics). Fred answers, Oxford is filthy rich with vast landholdings, tax
exempt. Can these be in the hands of rent-internalizing empire builders, hoarders who build, and
build, but enter not in (remember Lydia Huntley Sigourney)? We all know their kind. On the
other hand, we know spendthrifts, too. Grant us the wisdom to find the Golden Mean.


   3. Heathrow again. Whizzing back, it is a relief to find there is no hour-long wait to pass
through security, as there was twelve months earlier in the wake of Desert Storm. I had
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                     3

associated that tempo largo snake dance with Heathrow itself, but the judgment was premature, it
was all Saddam's fault. Had time for the oyster bar: prices about double what I pay at home. In
the gent's loo, an unmissable huge condom vendor looms up, utterly lacking British
understatement. Where, though, do passengers use them? In my seat you can't even cross your
legs.


   4. Jan Smuts Airport is in the chaos of construction. I was last off the plane and could easily
have got lost, mingled with workmen or other passengers, and perhaps entered illegally,
wandering around looking for the right way to immigration. I was surprised at the lax security.
   Who was Jan Smuts? He was an Afrikaner leader who negotiated his people's way back to
power after they lost the Boer War. He told British Liberal leader Sir Henry Campbell-
Bannerman, you can have us for an ally or an enemy, take your choice. Like any good lawyer,
Smuts knew the answer before he asked, for Sir Henry had opposed the war. The durable Smuts
kept his word over many years, delivering South Africa to England in World Wars I and II. More
cynically, one might view him as the Boer counterpart of the Indian zamindar, the local
landowner who sells out on the understanding the Brits will respect and protect his property. He
was also famous for strike-breaking. It's a complex world—I'll leave it at that.


   5. Through the looking glass. South Africans view life from an odd perspective, walking
upside down with their feet pointed toward the Big Dipper. Lots of things are backwards.
   a. Dangerous waters. Water taps are reversed, with hot on right. Fortunately color coding, red
and blue, helps one adjust.
    b. Redesigning heaven. The sun is off schedule, rising about when we are going to bed. The
sun is in the wrong course, rising in the northeast, setting in the northwest, standing north of us at
midday. March marks the start of autumn, with Sol headed north for the winter. At night, Orion
lies on his side. His sword still points to Canopus, second-brightest star after Sirius, but Canopus
is now overhead (in Riverside I can see it only in January, just above the southern horizon). The
Southern Cross is much smaller and less outstanding than I remember it from Biak, 1945, and
looks more like a small kite. Those early sailors were a pious lot, however (when they weren't
slaughtering enemies), and saw the Bible in everything.
   All that is disorienting: pity the early navigators, who relied on celestial navigation and
heavenly guidance. No wonder Columbus hit America six years before Vasco da Gama found
the Cape of Good Hope. Columbus stayed prudently above the equator.
   c. Life in the wrong lane. South Africans drive to the left, like Brits and Japanese. They shift
gears with the left hand, but still accelerate with the right foot. You handle this by letting others
drive, shutting up, and enjoying the scenery. Unfortunately, the leftward habit also affects
pedestrians, leading to a good deal of stutter-stepping and dark glares. Fortunately, red still
means stop and green means go, but see "d."
   d. Belittling the dominant. Instead of targeting ethnic out-groups for ridicule, South Africans
pick on "Koos van der Merwe" (Koh-us fahn dair Mairvay). Koos bears the brunt of stories that
in England are told of Irishmen, in the United States of "Polacks," in Canada of Newfies, in
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                 4

Alabama of Rastus, etc. (Van der Merwe runs red lights and stops at green. Asked why, he
answers, "Because I thought my brother might be coming on the cross street.")
   e. Redefining "African." An Afrikaner is not what we call an African, but a person of Dutch
ancestry born in Africa. His language, of Dutch descent, is Afrikaans. It differs from Holland
Dutch in those little shibboleths by which people identify their own kind—and they are their own
kind, very much so.
   There is no affinity between Holland Dutch and Afrikaners, who are mutually ashamed of the
relationship. Afrikaners may be the most culturally isolated European settlers in the world.
    f. Individualists at the public trough. Many whites are bilingual, but many happy isolationists
speak only Afrikaans. They are a majority, and have dominated politics since 1948, when they
retired the Anglophile Afrikaner Jan Smuts. Sons of the Pioneers (Voortrekkers), self-proclaimed
rugged individualists, they soon learned to use government to give themselves civil service jobs
and farm subsidies. Their individualism is of a group kind that will be familiar to Americans who
know the persistent clannishness of Dutch enclaves here (e.g., the Southern California dairy
industry). The righteous hypocrisy and double-talk of organized farmers is, of course,
worldwide.
   g. True individualists. Many individuals, as everywhere, defy stereotypes. Many leaders of
reform are Afrikaners. The ANC leadership includes Heinz Klug and Derek Hanekom, for
example. The leaders of our reform-minded conferences were mostly Afrikaners.
   h. Bilingualism. International conferences are held in English, which intellectual Afrikaners
speak with ease, but noticeable accents. Anglophones are affected, too, e.g., saying "Yah" for
"Yes." At the Universiteit van Pretoria, in the heart of Afrikanerdom, instruction and most
reading is in English, but exams are written in Afrikaans, adding a new intellectual challenge to
student life. Bilingualism might not work in a less embattled society, but ties of race and class
impel Europeans to accommodate each other.
    Instead of goodbye, everyone says "Go well." "I thought I was going to collect it" means I
thought I was a goner. An assessor is called a "valuer"; "assessor" means a prosecutor (as in
Spanish). "Braai" means barbecue (Trevor and Elizabeth put on a great one). A real estate broker
is an "estate agent," as in Britain, but, oddly, they have a NAREB. A minivan is a "combie." See
also under "foods."
   French surnames are common; they mostly speak Afrikaans and identify with Afrikaners:
anything, apparently, to remain unBritish. These French are descended from exiled Huguenots,
more Calvinist even than the Dutch. It is alleged they have a much stronger intellectual tradition
than Dutch Afrikaners, because they came here as religious refugees, like the Mayflower
Pilgrims, and not as ruffians, wharf rats, and penal colonists like the Dutch. Indeed, one Holland
Dutchman told me in all earnestness that the French influence is all that saved the Afrikaners
from remaining low-life barbarians "like the Australians." Take that, Crocodile Dundee!
   The extremist racist leader is the appropriately surnamed terrorist Terre’Blanche, also
appropriately christened Eugene.
   h. Fractured government. Cape Town is the legislative capitol, Pretoria the administrative
capitol, and Bloemfontein the judicial capitol. Inefficient, yes, but cheaper than civil strife.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                    5

   i. Racism and rhetoric. Almost all the people I dealt with were embarrassed by apartheid, etc.,
and defensive. They are hypersensitive to their international reputation and eager either to refute
or, without being disloyal, dissociate themselves from it. (To be sure, I wasn't associating with
the Nazis, many of whom don't speak English anyway.) They seem to assume I am a TV
insomniac who lives on a diet of slanted news clips, takes them all straight, and overgeneralizes
like a spiteful administrator laying a paper trail. I was not there to judge, and was impressed by
their efforts to rebuild a just society.
   Their hospitality is extravagant and amazing: I gained five pounds I didn't need. While my
hosts insisted on driving me through or by Soweto, the "Crossroads" area, and other teeming
shantytowns of incredible squalor, density, and extent, they were quick to point with pride to
areas with better housing, and positively glowed when I remarked that a certain block in Soweto
was "not as bad as I expected." We went everywhere with Rex Ahene, a black, without incident.
The glances we drew seemed more curious than hostile. Many well-meaning people have yet to
learn the proper idioms and linguistic protocols of non-racism, to be sure, but a few gaffes were
unintended and not to be overinterpreted. The most conservative person I met was, indeed, an
expatriate American, an ex-professor turned banker.
    j. Money. The famous hard rand is now soft. If the eponymous Ayn Rand chose her name to
intimate she was good as gold, her day is past (praise the Lord!). Gold has dropped worldwide,
and the rand with it. It used to be worth over a dollar; now, $0.35. The annual inflation rate is in
the high teens; interest rates 20% and more. Terms of trade favor tourists; Cape Towners are
panting to cash in and, with sanctions lifted, probably will, especially if they can improve air
service (see Appendix I). They have a crown jewel to sell.
   k. Sanctions. Sanctions have not starved out the economy, but saved the people from
quarreling over tariff policy. The effect of sanctions is only to do to a nation from outside what
nations do to themselves in time of peace. RSA has simply become more self-sufficient, with its
own electronics, its own oil-from-coal, etc. When people have good land and technical skills
they can make do without free trade (much as I favor it). They have much of the best
computerization from everywhere, including their own industry. The modern retrieval system at
the library of the University of Cape Town sure beats California's underfunded, unfinished
Melvyl system, with its beat-up old user terminals.
   The most unpopular name in South Africa, and the best-known American, is Congressman
Stephen Solarz. A nice Jewish lady named Solarz was especially vehement against him: he had
brought her considerable embarrassment. It's the old story: we may criticize ourselves, but
outsiders keep quiet. It is with high glee that they learn of his check-bouncing embarrassments.


    6. The miracle of Johannesburg. Jo-burg is Bootstrap City. It should have died when its gold
mines played out, like a proper mining boomtown; instead it remains as the economic capital of
its nation and half a continent.
   Johannesburg defies most laws of urban economics, e.g., that mines create no great cities.
Explainers still cite the mines, but its mines have played out; it should now be a ghost town. It
has no harbor, no water transportation, not even any gravity water supply. It is, in fact, on a ridge
top, the Rand or "reef," at an elevation over 5,000 feet.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                  6

    It has no sunburst of rail lines, like Chicago or Boston, "The Hub," except perhaps what it has
attracted itself. It is "on the main rail line," Explainers say, but so are a thousand miles of other
sites. The natural site lacks outstanding amenities, and certainly can't hold a candle to Cape
Town. Jo-burg has no governmental economic base. Surrounding farmland is poor. Why
Johannesburg? Why is it the largest city, the center of finance, industry, commerce, and
international air travel?
   As a public finance economist I may overvalue incentive taxation, but Jo-burg has it. The
property tax is on site value alone, and at a high rate: they tell me it is 4%. This is what makes
Jo-burg distinctive. Challenge and response: Jo-burg had to do something right in order to
survive, and that is what it did. It not only survived, it became and remains Number One. Give
me a better explanation and I'll back off. I haven't heard one yet.
   John Stuart Mill remarks in his autobiography that he had seen many bad policies replaced by
good ones, without in the least relieving the bad habits of mind of which bad policies are the
result. He referred to free trade. Thus also with Jo-burg and its site value tax, most people,
especially the Explainers, may live in the midst of a great applied demonstration of a principle,
and never see it.
   Jo-burg is not heaven, far from it. Its enlightened municipal policy has not solved the great
national problems of race discrimination and black homelessness: blacks might not buy land
there, or in any "white" area, until a year or so ago. However, prosperity anywhere helps people
everywhere. Alan Paton rather makes Jo-burg sound like the source of the problem, but that is
like blaming the Good Samaritan. Homeless blacks who drift to Jo-burg are not its products.
Rather, they come there for relief and refuge. Arguably, land taxation, extended to the whole
nation, would open up landownership to many more people than now, and accomplish the
necessary "land reform," as yet undefined, that is in the offing.
   Cape Town, by contrast, is Sleeping Beauty. It is gifted with one of the world's great sites,
ideal climate, and scenery. There are only so many continents, with so many southern tips in the
right latitude to replicate the Mediterranean climate (remember your "Koppen symbols" from
Geography 1A?). It also has the national legislative capitol. It enjoys the business potential of
New York with the climate of La Jolla, the scenery of Vancouver, and the political base of
Washington (or at least Sacramento). Tourists flock there, and would do so even if the place
were misgoverned by Mayor Idi Amin with Police Chief Saddam Hussein.
    Actually the Honorable Mayor Frank van der Velde is a good fellow who favors changing to a
site value tax. We never call it "the Jo-burg System" there—lots of jealousy—but some leaders
are considering tax reform on its merits. Up to now, however, Cape Town has subsisted without
that benefit, and suffers the usual consequences: urban sprawl, a fractured CBD, and acres of
blight on prime land that should bear housing for downtown workers. Vast rail yards off
downtown are little used, and there is no use of air space over the tracks.


   7. The Referendum. My trip was spiced up by uncertainty about F.W. de Klerk's referendum
on continuing negotiations to extend voting rights. I was headed for a conference on "… the new
South Africa"; when I took off I wondered if there was to be a new one at all. In London I
learned there was. The people I associated with were almost all greatly relieved by the outcome,
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                   7

even though it could ultimately disarrange their own upper-middle-class lives considerably.
Some are ready to accept that; others have confidence that good old F.W. will negotiate
reasonable protections for their interests. He seems a wily old fox, all right, but I fear they may
be heading toward a new era of ethnic machine politics where rent is redistributed via graft,
rather than the clean, efficient method of taxation, and social dividends for all. My pitch is that
the present leadership should show its ability and will to implement populist ideals under
professional guidance, before they lose the power to do that, or anything else.


    8. Light traffic. RSA has built itself a magnificent modern infrastructure: highways, a power
grid, electric rail, water projects, etc. The uncluttered highways are lots of fun, but one wonders
if they aren't out of balance with the private economy. There's no question the Cape Town City
Hall is out of balance. Every little desk is surrounded by 2,000 square feet or so of floor space,
under high ceilings. Mutter, if you will, moralisms about waste in government, but it reminds me
first of the head office of a big private bank. Waste and unbalance have many sources.
   Back to the empty highways: they are certainly of little use to the majority of blacks, who lack
cars. There is a high tax on petrol, and a protected local firm, SASOL, making gasoline from
coal by a process developed, I believe, in blockaded Germany during World War I or II. Maybe
we'll need that someday. Ecologists say we should save endangered species to conserve genetic
diversity. Likewise blockades, sanctions, and tariffs, with all their faults, conserve technological
diversity.


   9. Black Visibility. If this is "white country" you would never guess it from the streets and
byways. Now that the pass laws are dead, blacks can wander everywhere, and do. The operative
principle is fairly simple, although constantly forgotten. Drive people off the private land and
you drive them onto public highways. As Henry George kept saying, man cannot live without
land. They have to stand, sit, sleep, and earn a living somewhere. Where else can they go?
   Reminds me of an old ditty: "A college economist planned to live without access to land. He
nearly succeeded, but found that he needed food, clothing, and someplace to stand."
   Sidewalks in downtown Jo-burg are covered with "hawkers," reminiscent of Taipeh. Many
roadside fences, too, are draped with textiles for sale. Cape Town somehow prevents this—
another difference between the two cities, although it may just be a matter of time. It is not for
lack of human material near Cape Town: there are about 1.5 million squatters in the
"Crossroads" area. Cape Town must have busy police and tough judges. They do allow selected
street people. We heard some delightful indigenous music, calypso-like, on a sort of pan-pipe,
with guitar accompaniment: nothing like the blaring, wailing, amateurish saxes you can't avoid in
the dark caverns of New York or Philadelphia, or cafes of New Orleans or San Francisco.
    Hawkers constitute a considerable "gray market," free of some taxes. VAT, newly introduced,
is defended as catching them. This strikes me as bad policy anywhere, and more so where
unemployment is pushing 50%. Marginal activity, by definition, yields no taxable surplus.
Taxation can only abort it, as my host Godfrey Dunkley keeps reminding everyone. Now land
rents, on the other hand…
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                  8

    In "peri-urban" Jo-burg, black strollers are constantly in view, wandering across fields and
along roads. Where and why they are going is not clear, but one suspects they would wander less
if they had places to stand still, sit, lie, and improve.
   To be sure they have their "homelands." The name is not just ironic, but deceptive. They've
been driven from their actual homelands, and overcrowded onto desperate leavings of land newly
called "homelands" to conceal the truth. Eighty percent of the people are squeezed onto 13% of
the land area, and until very recently forbidden to buy land on the other 87%, or even sojourn
there without a pass. Now they are grandly told to let bygones be bygones, respect and firm up
existing property rights, and start the game of "free market." It's now a "level playing field,"
where fair is fair and the best man wins—if he starts the game owning the playing field. Little
wonder they don't buy the free market concept, as usually proffered them. Did you think they're
as stupid as Americans?


   10. Wealth and Poverty. Upon arriving in Jo-burg it was my privilege to lunch with three
bankers. These are good, idealistic bankers, striving to funnel credit to the needy and, in one
case, to reform land tenure. (They also treated me to lunch.) I mean them no ill when I note two
phenomena.
   a. Security. Entering bank offices is like entering a secure zone: I.D. required, x-rays, tags,
etc. Jo-burg is a city under siege.
   b. Land and conflict. Opulent Persian rugs are much in evidence. These reminded me how
near we are the Indian Ocean and the source, but also how wide is the gap between rich and
poor. One of those rugs is worth the price of many squatter shacks.
   Don't misunderstand, I know blacks can't prosper just by taking from whites. Basically, they
must increase output. "Growth, not redistribution, is the answer," goes the chant, and somehow
that always means tax breaks for property, a la George Bush. Still, that by itself is empty
conservative moralizing that papers over a great fundamental truth: land doesn't grow. Blacks
can get more and better only by leaving less and worse to others. "They aren't making any more
of it."
   Whites prospered by taking land from blacks. Granted they are advanced, productive people,
with a technological and institutional edge; still they would do poorly in the kind of Bantustans
they have relegated for blacks. Land is the basis of white prosperity. Like all land it is stolen,
only here the memory is fresher, and sharpened by racism.
   Of land it is unfortunately true, blacks can get more only by taking from whites. That is the
inescapable truth of nature, and the source of all conflict. Everything else is diversionary and
namby-pamby. Land is where it's at. There must be massive redistribution, and it won't all be
"win-win," goody-goody Pareto optimizing. Someone must end up with less, like it or not. The
sooner we face the truth, the sooner we'll find solutions.


   11. Home and Hardware. Host Godfrey Dunkley took us to visit his son Trevor, with wife
Elizabeth. They live in peri-urban Jo-burg, in and around a sprawling ranch house on many acres
of dryish land, in a compound with Trevor's brother Nigel and Elizabeth's brother and wife. The
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                  9

last two live under a thatched roof, of which there are many: they are highly regarded for their
cooling properties, and apparently will last as long as wood (although I got a wide range of
answers to that question). The thatch is of native craftsmanship and design, even though
Europeans also had such a tradition, as the surname of Britain's last lady leader should remind
us. At Oxford, Fred H. had shown me a thatched cottage the natives think remarkable. In a wet
climate, probably it is; in South Africa they are commonplace.
    Elizabeth's brother is a colorful, athletic character, who formerly ran a reptile park of some
kind. He entertained us with a cobra, which he released from a covered container, caught by the
tail, and handled expertly, fearlessly. These are all resourceful, talented people who seem
confident swinging from one business to another, and prospering. Trevor and Elizabeth run a
business that involves intensive computer bookkeeping plus showing wares or samples from a
truck that tours the black townships. This is no sheltered life.
   Nigel seemed to be learning to use some sort of pistol. I gradually became aware they all
carry hardware, all the time. Elizabeth, a self-possessed, engaging young wife, carries hers
tucked under the belt of her jeans, demurely covered by a shirttail. That is style, like one of
James Bond's femmes fatales, but the facts are less glamorous. There have been several break-
ins, putatively by former ANC goons and guerrillas now unemployed by the outbreak of
negotiations. Maintaining liberal politics in these conditions takes a big view of things. That's the
kind of people the Dunkleys are, with sangfroid, self-preservation, and compassion, all in one.
They deserve the best: hope they survive to enjoy it.


   12. City under siege. We visited Stephen Meintjies' (rhymes with pint-cheese) home on a
shaded street in an upper-middle-class section of Jo-burg. Stephen is co-author of The Trial of
Chaka Dlamini, a Socratic dialogue with Georgist morals for South Africans. All the stands
(lots) are walled, gated, wired, and posted. This is indeed a city under siege. The neighborhood
church is similarly protected. Before underlining the irony and imputing hypocrisy to African
Christians, let's recall a popular painting of our own Pilgrim fathers trudging to church in the
snow, bearing arms. Here and now, as there and then, it is a matter of simple survival.


   13. A Hostile Demonstration. Swinging around the Jo-burg beltway, Godfrey abruptly pulled
over, announcing, "It's a demonstration by the hostiles; get out and take pictures!" That struck
me as imprudent, but what does an American know? The hostiles were colorfully equipped with
native shields and spears, swarming up the bank right to the edge of the freeway, looking angry
and excited. The police apparently agreed with me and quickly ordered us on, but Rex got some
good snaps. (My Christmas camcorder was home with dear wife, who was convinced the
fascistic police would confiscate any films I took, and besides, she wanted to use it.)
   Actually, there were several white men filming the hostiles from within their ranks, without
apparently feeling threatened. I came to realize this was partly theater and partly recreation. It
was also in memory of the Sharpeville Massacre. I also learned that "hostile" is spelled hostel.
These are not exactly youth hostels for biking students, but barracks for single males working in
town. "By the hostels" was a location, not an attribution of intent, although heaven knows they
have cause to be hostile. Whew, another crisis passed.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                10


   14. Afrikaners close up. Holiday Inn, Pretoria, is full of Afrikaners. Dutchmen generally are
big people, and handsome—at least by our conventions; Afrikaners seem bigger, and
consistently blonder. They appear more physical, perhaps sensual, tending to youthful
athleticism or middle-aged fat, without much in between (except the intellectuals). They come in
groups, and studiously ignore you, looking through or away. They don't seem hostile, but
aloof—the very word is Dutch, meaning windward, the opposite of alee. Their casual dress
indicates they feel at home here, this is their turf. The men wear shockingly short shorts. The
aloofness I found depressing. Were it not for our group, I would have felt very alone. They look
like close relatives, but are so remote. How did we drift so far apart?


   15. Foods. A superior, chewy, fresh-baked whole-grain bread is widely available. At the salad
bar whole loaves are supplied: you slice your own, and hope the previous hands were clean. My
gracious hostess, Mrs. Sterling, baked individual mini-loaves daily, and I could have lived on
them alone, if the other food weren't so good as well. Cape Town features all kinds of fish with
new names I forget, except "snouk," served as a pate spread. Stuart and his friend John, who
preceded me, report enjoying good meals of zebra and antelope, which they tried "because the
lions enjoy them so much," but I never got so lionhearted. Mussels at Bertie's are a specialty,
with a special fattening sauce Tish and my doctor would never approve, but, as they say, it is
easier to get forgiveness than permission. One hopes they come from a distance, because Cape
Town sewage turns the waves gray over a considerable stretch of ocean frontage—not that Cape
Town is so big, but with all that ocean out there one gets careless. Mangoes are a staple; one of
Yvonne Dunkley's dangerous desserts with heavy cream is especially memorable. Godfrey
remains rail-thin regardless, aided no doubt by his propensity to dip in the cold ocean, where he
also lured me to burn some fat by nearly freezing to death. "Venison" abounds, but in its original
meaning of wild game, not normally deer here. A "roll-mop" is herring rolled around a pickle.
   Local wines are smooooth as silk, and I rediscovered a pleasure from long, long ago when
once I could enjoy California wine. I hypothesize the difference between wine then and now is
the curse of national marketing and absentee ownership, and the associated overuse of sulfur
dioxide, found on every California and French label, but missing from South African labels. The
hypothesis is based on my prejudice more than research, because South Africa has no labeling
laws like ours, and who knows what's in their wine? All I know for certain is my body tolerates
their wines and not ours; and it used to tolerate ours.
   A popular local herbal tea is "rooibos" (red bush). They say it grows only in South Africa. I
like it, and exported a pack.


   16. Survival rations. Jo-burg to Pretoria, the countryside is arid and bleak. It gives the same
lone, lost feeling as the empty landscapes in Star Wars. The basic survival food here is "mealies"
(a word derived from a Dutch homophone), from the local grain sorghum or "Kaffir Corn."
(Kaffir is from the Arabic word for "infidel.”) The "corn" is a drought-resistant grain now
common in the former dust bowl of the United States. Like Samuel Johnson's oats, in the United
States it is food for cattle; in the Bantustans, for men. There is a myth that a few mealies keep the
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                               11

natives happy. I suppose that soothes the conscience, but it seems to me I've heard that song
before, and it didn't ring true then, either.


   17. U.S. Department of State. An unexpected bonus in Pretoria was being invited to a
reception and dinner at the U.S. Embassy, to which I was driven by chauffeur. The host, Don
Steinberg, is apparently second only to the ambassador, although I failed to catch his exact title.
My good luck was by courtesy of John Strasma, a fellow conferee and good old friend from the
Land Tenure Center of Madison, Wisconsin. John was there at the behest of ANC land expert
Derek Hanekom, his trip underwritten by USAID. Don Steinberg turned out to be an old
Angeleno and, more important, a fellow Reedie, as well as genial and personable. We hit it off
famously; copy to the Alumni News.


   18. Segregation. I got no feeling that South African whites have any problem associating and
sharing lunch counters with blacks, as in the old South. They shake hands, share loos and queues
and schmooze and booze and probably pews without apparent strain. Mews and snooze may be
another story: housing is the last bastion, because it entails land tenure.
   Under the former Group Areas Act the races were divided into at least five groups: white,
black, "colored" (mixed), Indian, and "Malay." The "Malays" are coloreds with an admixture of
oriental genes and a custom of wearing skullcaps and frequenting mosques.
   The act is dead, but its inertia remains. Land use is tightly controlled in the name of "good
planning": have they been studying us? The city planner carries himself like the VIP he is, with
that distinctive air of importance and impatience we find at home in the director of public works
and city manager. Actually I rather liked City Planner Neville Riley: beneath his swagger and
reputation for power-hunger lurks a human being. It's hard for an Irishman to be a complete
SOB, although it has been done.
   Residential segregation lingers on. The "Malays" occupy what is now prime land, overlooking
the CBD and Table Bay, and are apparently scheduled for gentrification. It would be a shame if
they introduce a site-value tax and then blame it for this, its least attractive face.
    The Riviera is fairly intensively developed and, of course, pure white. Isn't it odd how sailors
at sea long for dry land, while lubbers on land pay top rand to be near the ocean? Guess that's
"edge effect" again. Whatever, this is prime real estate at prime prices.
    It will be a long time before blacks can afford to buy in this area. How fair is a level playing
field when the other guys own the field? The wonderful thing about South Africa as a study is
that the attributes and problems of all societies stand out in forms so exaggerated, so clear, so
literally black-and-white, no one can miss the point. No one? Some people can tune out anything,
and do, and will until the guillotine falls.
   On a less cosmic note, the mundane parking squeeze that plagues intensive land use elsewhere
is minimized here by the high price of cars and petrol, and corresponding presence of mass
transit.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                  12

   19. Cape of Good Hope. Only pictures and a globe can do it justice. You're on a high point
with a sheer drop 1,000 feet or so to rocks and breakers in aquamarine, looking south to the pivot
of the world on ice, thinking deep thoughts about infinity, astronomy, destiny, and of course
economics. Chicago economists often say the value of land is all manmade, like capital, but I
wonder how long it would take to make another Cape of Good Hope? It’s a thrill and an
inspiration, but remember, O Absent-minded Philosopher, shield your eyes from the wind, and
don't fall.
   On the lighter and surprising side, there are wild baboons around, cadging sugar cubes from
German tourists who can't read the warning signs. Godfrey, no shrinking violet, lectures them
sternly with international gestures, and they retreat in shame.


   20. Back to London. I returned via London, thereat to spend two days poring over
manuscripts with Fred Harrison, my co-editor. I was to have stayed at Fred's and Rita's in
Teddington, but the house was occupied by relatives come to be with Fred's mother, who had
just suffered a heart attack. They put me up in style, therefore, at the Richmond Hill Hotel with
the swells. Richmond Hill is a renowned beauty spot overlooking green fields and a graceful
bend in the Thames, just above London. Publisher Anthony Werner joined us, and we did our
business strolling in a nearby park, totally free of muggers but not of joggers, who constitute
their own kind of menace. It is actually quite comical to watch them chugging along; they look
so damned earnest, as though running in a circle gets you anywhere. Ah Cruikshank, thou
shouldst be living at this hour: what splendid material for caricatures. Failing that requested
reincarnation, I should think a camcording with appropriate voice-overs could be a howler, and
the actors are free.
   Richmond Hill apartments are jammed tight together. A benefit of this is that a short stroll
brings you to the nearest pub, where I had the best ale ever in my life—literally. Its subtitle is
"Old Peculiar." I forget the proper name, and a good job that is, for it could make one forget
everything.
   A greater benefit is that another step or two brings you to some bookstores. One, a
secondhand shop, is right out of Dickens, with ladders and must and all, until the owner coughs
and is sorry to disturb you, sir, but it is closing time. The other sells new books and I pick one by
Paul Johnson, one of his heavy histories of everything that ever happened, and why. How sad
that a man of so much energy and culture should be so reactionary. This wave must be cresting;
things can't go on like this much longer. Tiring of Johnson I take another step and view a flick,
Bugsy. This is a mistake: it is coarse, sadistic, depressing, poorly acted, and I don't need to travel
to London to see pictures of California. Is it only coincidence that Paul Johnson and Bugsy are
popular in the same era? I think not.
    I thought I suffered hardships on crowded, flight-delayed BA, and grumbled loudly
(Appendix I). However, Fred was off for Japan via Aeroflot(!), through the chaos of a
disintegrating organization. When he returns, if he does, he'll pass it off as nothing, nothing at
all, really, just a day in the life of a journalist.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                13

    20. Home is where the heart is. I cherish the new friends I made abroad, but, dear Lord, how
grand it was to greet smiling wife and children at LAX, and to be with them always. What a
relief to tackle the pile of work I left behind and which bore on my conscience every moment.
Being separated is not as bad as being in jail, but there is an analogous frustration. My garden,
my workshop, my hard disk, my students, my unfinished MSS—this is where I belong and am
productive. There is no greater satisfaction.



                                      APPENDIX I: Bad BA
    Brits bristle at any breath of badmouthing BA, but that is knee-jerk chauvinism. BA is just
another privatized monopoly now; customers are its cattle. Normal procedure at BA is to board
passengers, lock door, then perform deferred maintenance for an hour or two. Perhaps this is
training passengers to endure a real highjacking. Heathrow-JHB, captain announced we could
have flown all right, but some part needed replacing for the following startup, and he wasn't sure
JHB was up to it—bit of British chauvinism, sat well with Brits, was not repeated in Afrikaans.
After two hours we actually did take off. Next insult was to spray the cabin with insecticide,
accompanied by added insult to JHB, announcing this was due to their municipal regulation
(later denied). Next insult is to show "news" on screen, said news being nothing but talking-head
commercials and teaser bites from films not being shown. Next insult is to block aisles with carts
selling duty-frees, just when you need to seek the johns, which are undersupplied anyway. Some
accountant figured out there's no money in johns and legroom and aisles and free entertainment;
some economic theorist wrote this proves no one really wants them anyway. Ah, deregulation
and "the market," what wrongs are done in thy names! By now I have figured out we are just
cattle to BA, and will remain so until we turn into lions and tigers; better yet, men and women.
It's hard to stand up and be counted, though, when there's no room to stand.
   Worse things happened on return. JHB-Heathrow, one stop in Nairobi added three to four
hours: one hour extra flight time, three hours locked in on the tarmac. Finally the silent captain
announced the mechanics had been "tightening up tubes and things with spanners" to stop an air
leak they couldn't find, and he wasn't too sure, but it was probably OK to proceed.
   When they boarded Nairobi passengers, wouldn't you know, I got a 350-pound neighbor. Try
as he might, he was physically unable to contain himself in his allotted space. It was a lovely
eight and a half hours to London. I see some heavy fellow is suing Southwest Airlines for
ejecting him: he thinks the world owes him two seats for the price of one. Bad timing to win my
sympathy.
   I hope he loses, but that the court orders all airlines to supply wider seats. While they're at it,
how about smaller planes and more trips? These jumbos create a baggage crisis every time they
land, anyway. In these respects, Southwest Airlines is exemplary: everything BA is not. It uses
737s, leaves promptly, gives you three to four inches more legroom, arrives on time, and unloads
fast.
   Remember "Getting there is half the fun?" That was then. Now we fly because we must, not
because we please to squeeze. There are now some 1,200 commercial aircraft, worth $2 billion,
in cold storage in America, many of them in a spectacular ghost-port near Mojave, Kern County.
Gaffney                      South African Diary, March 17-30, 1992                                 14

Excess capacity, fixed prices, reduced service, hmmmm… isn't that what cartels do? Wouldn't it
be better all around to use that idle capacity to give customers a break?


   Deregulation and free choice
   i. Customer has choice of buying various kinds of liquor in duty-free shops. Has no choice
about controlling his environment.
  - leg-room, is squeezed in. Could go first or business class for about four times the fare, to get
maybe 20% to 30% more room.
   - has no choice to clear the aisles of carts, which block access to restrooms because they are
pushing sales of liquor.
  - no choice of visual entertainment. That might be unavoidable, except it is forced. It is full of
commercials. Crew insists people pull shades, adding to claustrophobia.
   - no choice of deplaning during long stops, e.g., Nairobi.


   Excess capacity in aircraft
   There is vast cold storage area in Mojave Desert for surplus aircraft. Same time, passengers
are overcrowded, herded, on existing aircraft, and restricted in choice of flights: routes and times.
  Larger number of smaller planes would be better. Jumbos impose great diseconomies of scale,
mostly on passengers: long queues.


   A bias for cash
  Customer comfort and convenience (and probably safety) is consistently sacrificed for goals
more obviously translated into measurable dollars. Customer time has no immediately
measurable value to administrators. Yet, saving time is why people fly.


   Paving the road to Hell
   Aka law of unintended consequences. Net result of treating passengers like cattle is to take the
pleasure out of flying. Flying used to be an adventure; now it is an ordeal. We fly because we
have to, not because we enjoy the process. This in turn cuts off demand.
