                   Enterprising Johannesburg and Sleepy Cape Town: A Contrast


                                   Mason Gaffney, Working Paper



                                    The Miracle of Johannesburg
  Jo-burg is Bootstrap City. It should have died when its gold mines played out, like a proper
mining boomtown; instead it remains as the economic capital of its nation and half a continent.
   Johannesburg defies most laws of urban economics, e.g., that mines create no great cities.
Explainers still cite the mines, but its mines have played out; it should now be a ghost town. It
has no harbor, no water transportation, not even any gravity water supply. It is, in fact, on a ridge
top, the Rand or "reef," at an elevation over five thousand feet.
    It has no sunburst of rail lines, like Chicago or Boston, "the Hub," except perhaps what it has
attracted itself. It is "on the main rail line," explainers say, but so are a thousand miles of other
sites. The natural site lacks outstanding amenities, and certainly can't hold a candle to Cape
Town. Jo-burg has no governmental economic base. Surrounding farmland is poor. Why
Johannesburg? Why is it the largest city, the center of finance, industry, commerce, and
international air travel?
   As a public finance economist I may overvalue incentive taxation, but Jo-burg has it. The
property tax is on site value alone, and at a high rate: they tell me it is 4%. This is what makes
Jo-burg distinctive. Challenge and response: Jo-burg had to do something right in order to
survive, and that is what it did. It not only survived, it became and remains No. 1. Give me a
better explanation and I'll back off. I haven't heard one yet.
   John Stuart Mill remarks in his autobiography that he had seen many bad policies replaced by
good ones, without in the least relieving the bad habits of mind of which bad policies are the
result. He referred to free trade. Thus also with Jo-burg and its site value tax, most people,
especially the explainers, may live in the midst of a great applied demonstration of a principle,
and never see it.
   Jo-burg is not heaven, far from it. Its enlightened municipal policy has not solved the great
national problems of race discrimination and black homelessness: blacks could not buy land
there, or in any "white" area, until a year or so ago. However, prosperity anywhere helps people
everywhere. Alan Paton rather makes Jo-burg sound like the source of the problem, but that is
like blaming the Good Samaritan. Homeless blacks who drift to Jo-burg are not its products.
Rather, they come there for relief and refuge. Arguably, land taxation, extended to the whole
nation, would open up landownership to many more people than now, and accomplish the
necessary "land reform," as yet undefined, that is in the offing.


                                   The Somnolence of Cape Town
   Cape Town, by contrast, is Sleeping Beauty. It is gifted with one of the world's great sites,
ideal climate and scenery. There are only so many continents, with so many southern tips in the
Gaffney          Enterprising Johannesburg and Sleepy Cape Town: A Contrast                         2

right latitude to replicate the Mediterranean climate (remember your "Koppen Symbols" from
Geography 1A?). It also has the national legislative capitol. It enjoys the business potential of
New York with the climate of La Jolla, the scenery of Vancouver, and the political base of
Washington (or at least Sacramento). Tourists flock there, and would do so even if the place
were misgoverned by Mayor Idi Amin with Police Chief Saddam Hussein.
   Actually the Honorable Mayor, Frank van der Velde, is a good fellow who favors changing to
a site value tax. We never call it "The Jo-burg System" there—lots of jealousy—but some
leaders are considering tax reform on its merits. Up to now, however, Cape Town has subsisted
without that benefit, and suffers the usual consequences: urban sprawl, a fractured central
business district, and acres of blight on prime land that should bear housing for downtown
workers. Vast rail yards off downtown are little used, and there is no use of air space over the
tracks.
