                                Chicago’s Growth Spurt, 1890-1900


                                   Mason Gaffney, Working Paper



    Chicago grew by 54%, 1890-1900. This is complicated by annexation (Hoyt, p.153), but is
still a notable spurt, even in that decade of urban growth elsewhere. Chicago did not just spread
out, it pioneered the skyscraper, and centralized its transit system as few other cities ever did.
   Many signs point to a single-tax trend in Chicago during this period. Chicago lawyer John
Peter Altgeld, humanitarian and reformer, was governor of Illinois, 1892-1896. His
administration contained several single-taxers, including young Brand Whitlock, future mayor of
Toledo, whom Altgeld inspired (Bremner, pp.57-58). Altgeld directly corresponded and worked
with Henry George, and, according to Whitlock, "understood" George's ideas like few others
(Barker, pp. 594, 607, 609).
   In Chicago, unlike Detroit, rails paid property taxes. A tribute came from the rival state of
Michigan: "... if there could be an illustration stronger than any other of prosperity built upon
proper rules—that example is Chicago." (Statement by Don M. Dickinson, a lawyer serving pro
bono, representing Detroit Council at Michigan Legislature, 1891, cited in Pingree, 1895.)
   In 1892 Chicago won its leading case, I.C.R.R. v. Illinois (146 U.S. 387), invoking the
“public trust doctrine” to revoke the railroad corporation’s claim to lands that now comprise
Chicago’s lakefront park system. This was nicely synchronized with its Columbian Exposition,
an impressive display of civic spirit.
   It was under Governor Altgeld that the Illinois Bureau of Labor Statistics, under George
Schilling, published its famous 8th Annual Report, 1894, including comprehensive Lorenz-Curve
data on the concentration of landownership in the Loop of Chicago. There is no comparable
study, to my knowledge, of any other American city. It is most likely that such radicalism in
Springfield had its effect locally in Chicago. Schilling was a Chicago labor leader, known to
Altgeld.
   Chicago was a national center of radical thought and activity in this age of Clarence Darrow,
Henry D. Lloyd, Jane Addams, Mayor Edward F. Dunne, Julia Lathrop, Daniel Burnham, Frank
Lloyd Wright, Ida Tarbell, Edgar Lee Masters, Alexander Stuart Bradley and the anti-Monopoly
League, John Dewey, Margaret Haley, Thorstein Veblen, Edward Bemis, Louis F. Post and his
Georgist journal (The Public), Gene Debs, Warren Worth Bailey, Vachel Lindsay, the young
Carl Sandburg, Florence Kelley, et al.
   Chicago in the 1890s pioneered the skyscraper. Such substitution of capital for land suggests a
de facto policy of targeting property tax assessments more on land, less on buildings. Louis
Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright, and many in the Chicago school of architects favored downtaxing
buildings, if only from self-interest. At the same time, Chicago did not develop its highly
centralized mass transit system without taxing real estate to permit of low fares, as did Tom
Johnson in Cleveland. A city that taxes real estate without overtaxing buildings must be taxing
land values.
Gaffney                       Chicago’s Growth Spurt, 1890-1900                                  2

   Chicago's consciousness of land values is shown by its being the only city to have anything
like George C. Olcott's annual Blue Book of Land Values—Olcott also being a supporter of the
Chicago Single Tax Club, and the author of “Chicago’s Amazing Growth.” Chicago inspired
Homer Hoyt's classic One Hundred Years of Land Values in Chicago. Chicagoan Richard
Babcock's classic Valuation of Real Estate shows a strong Purdy influence.
   John Peter Altgeld, returning to Chicago after 1896, became active in city politics. Mayor
Edward F. Dunne, an Altgeld ally, later governor of Illinois, had strong single-tax leanings, and
brought in Tom Johnson from Cleveland as an adviser. Later Mayor William Dever was Dunne's
protégé. Even the corrupt William Thompson, Dever's nemesis, was growth-oriented and "open
to suggestion." That does not fully add up, however, to a definitive showing that a city
administration consciously shifted taxes to land values, as in Toledo, Cleveland, New York,
Detroit, and Milwaukee. More research into Chicago's political history is needed.
